[Unknown]: IVM.
[Amit Varma]: Unity unites us and we can celebrate together in different ways.
[Amit Varma]: But politics in Maharashtra is based more around what divides us.
[Amit Varma]: Do you speak Marathi or Gujarati or Hindi?
[Amit Varma]: Are you Brahmin or Maratha or Dalit?
[Amit Varma]: Are you from Vidarbha or Marathwada or Konkan or Mumbai?
[Amit Varma]: Are you a farmer or a banker?
[Amit Varma]: And amid these divisions, there is one overarching quality that unites all political parties.
[Amit Varma]: Opportunism, the will to power.
[Amit Varma]: That's the central theme that runs through the gripping ongoing drama of Maharashtra
[Amit Varma]: politics.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Maharashtra politics has been in the news recently, but in this episode, I want to take
[Amit Varma]: a broader and deeper look at it than what we get in the present.
[Amit Varma]: I want to take a journey through the last few decades of Maharashtra politics and try
[Amit Varma]: to get a better grip on this deeply complex ecosystem.
[Amit Varma]: And I cannot think of a better guest for this purpose than Sujata Anandan.
[Amit Varma]: Sujata has been a political reporter since the 1980s, and I've been admiring her columns
[Amit Varma]: on local politics since I first came to Mumbai in 1995.
[Amit Varma]: She's also written two deeply insightful books, Hindu Hriday Samrat about the life and times
[Amit Varma]: of Balasaheb Thackeray and the Shiv Sena and Maharashtra Maximus, a broader sociopolitical
[Amit Varma]: history of the state.
[Amit Varma]: She's a legend in the space, and I'm delighted that she's agreed to come on the show and
[Amit Varma]: share her insights with me.
[Amit Varma]: Before we begin our conversation, though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Like me, are you someone who loves fine art but can't really afford to have paintings
[Amit Varma]: by the artists you like hanging on your walls?
[Amit Varma]: Well, worry no more.
[Amit Varma]: Head on over to Indian colors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Indian Colors is a company that licenses images of the finest modern art from some of the
[Amit Varma]: best artists in India and adapts them into objects of everyday use.
[Amit Varma]: These include wearable art, like stoles and shrugs, home decor like cushion covers and
[Amit Varma]: table runners, and accessories like tote bags.
[Amit Varma]: This allows art lovers to actually get fine art into their homes at an accessible price,
[Amit Varma]: and artists get royalties on sales, just like authors do.
[Amit Varma]: What's more, Indian Colors now has an exciting range of new products, including fridge magnets
[Amit Varma]: with some stunning motifs, and salad bowls and platters made of mango wood.
[Amit Varma]: Their artists include luminaries like Babu Xavier, Vazvo X Vazvo, Brinda Miller, Dilip
[Amit Varma]: Sharma, Shruti Nelson, and Pradeep Mishra.
[Amit Varma]: They accept bulk orders for corporate and festival gifting, but even if you want to
[Amit Varma]: buy just for yourself or a friend, head on over to IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: That's colors with an O-U.
[Amit Varma]: And if you want a 20% discount, apply the code IVM20.
[Amit Varma]: That's I-V-M for IVM Podcast.
[Amit Varma]: IVM20 for a 20% discount at IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Sujata, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: My pleasure.
[Amit Varma]: I've been following you, as I mentioned in my intro since the 1990s.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, while many of the finest political reporters today are women, back in the day,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you were almost an exception in that sense, because there was this feeling
[Amit Varma]: that in journalism, women do the soft beat, they do the features, they do all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And you were a proper hardcore political reporter.
[Guest]: How did you get into journalism and reporting?
[Guest]: I basically took a journalism course because I wanted to join the IAS.
[Guest]: And I thought taking a journalism course will teach me essay writing, which had a lot of
[Guest]: marks on that.
[Guest]: But once I went into journalism, I never looked back and I didn't want to become an IAS officer.
[Guest]: I wanted to continue as a journalist.
[Guest]: Political journalism, I applied for a job to Times of India.
[Guest]: And there the editor told me that, you know, I was writing on Rotary clubs, Lions clubs,
[Guest]: you know, dance shows, things like that.
[Guest]: What you said, you know, I mean, soft journalism, entertainment.
[Guest]: And he saw my portfolio and he said that if this is the kind of journalism you want to
[Guest]: do, I suggest you go and start teaching English at Elphinstone College, because you can still
[Guest]: continue to do this in your spare time, you know, I mean, but if you want to be a real
[Guest]: journalist, you have to choose either business journalism or political journalism.
[Guest]: Now, I didn't have a head for business journalism, you know, so I got pushed into political journalism
[Guest]: against my will.
[Guest]: But once I was there, I realized my editor was right.
[Guest]: He said that I was a natural and I realized that I was indeed a natural in political journalism.
[Amit Varma]: And were you already interested in politics in general?
[Amit Varma]: Or is that something you had to cultivate after you?
[Guest]: No, I was not.
[Guest]: In fact, I hated politics at that point of time, which is why I was doing the soft entertainment
[Guest]: journalism.
[Guest]: But when I began my career, there was nothing like entertainment journalism, you know, I
[Guest]: mean, I always tell people that had there been entertainment journalism at that time,
[Guest]: I would have been an entertainment editor rather than a political editor by this time,
[Guest]: you know, I mean, but I got pushed into it against my will.
[Guest]: I hated it in the first few months in the first couple of years.
[Guest]: But once I got the hang of it, I think I was able to understand the political nuances much
[Amit Varma]: better than many other people.
[Amit Varma]: And what was it like in those early days, like, you know, when you're going out on the
[Amit Varma]: beat, you're meeting politicians, did they take you seriously?
[Amit Varma]: How did they treat you?
[Amit Varma]: How do you learn to sort of talk in their kind of language and have them open up to
[Guest]: you?
[Guest]: You know, when I started out, like you said earlier, there were very few women in the
[Guest]: field.
[Guest]: A couple of them were there before me, Olga Telles was there, you know, I mean, I think
[Guest]: she was the first political woman correspondent, and a couple more in Marathi journalism.
[Guest]: And many of us who were covering active politics, like having to visit Mantralaya, having to
[Guest]: visit the Legislative Assembly during sessions, we had a real battle on our hands in the beginning,
[Guest]: because you know, the legislators, the MLAs coming from villages, coming from small towns,
[Guest]: they were just not used to seeing, you know, women in such freedom modes, you know, I mean,
[Guest]: like we were free, we were coming there, we were talking, we were laughing, you know,
[Guest]: I mean, we were taking our place equally amongst the men, and they just couldn't get over that.
[Guest]: So many of them thought that we were up for some game.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, they made passes at us, you know, I mean, and they tried to get a
[Guest]: lot more serious, but then all of us, all the women journalists, we really put them
[Guest]: in their place, you know, I mean, there was one senior woman journalist who took me under
[Guest]: her wing.
[Guest]: And she said, whenever these MLAs come close to me, and they put their face close to me,
[Guest]: and say, kai bai, kai chal laa hai, so I tell them, bai nai, tai mana.
[Guest]: You know that I'm your elder sister, you know, I mean, I'm not just another woman.
[Guest]: And I tell them keep a distance of at least five feet from where you're standing and talking
[Guest]: to me.
[Guest]: And you should also be very careful about this.
[Guest]: But you know, she was one of the pioneers.
[Guest]: So she had cleared the way quite a lot.
[Guest]: By the time I came into journalism, yes, there were some ministers, there were some MLAs
[Guest]: who tried to make passes.
[Guest]: But I knew how to deal with it, you know, I put them in their place.
[Guest]: And once they got to know, once they got to know that you were not up for all these things,
[Guest]: then they began to take you very seriously.
[Amit Varma]: And also, I guess language was never a problem for you.
[Amit Varma]: Because like you mentioned, before we started our conversation, you've pretty much grown
[Amit Varma]: up here, though, and you said you've come from MP, where you were born.
[Amit Varma]: And isn't that something you have in common with Mr. Thackeray's father, Keshav Thackeray
[Guest]: also came from MP to Maharashtra.
[Guest]: Yes, he did come from MP to Maharashtra, but he actually migrated.
[Guest]: I was born there.
[Guest]: My father was posted in Amarnath, close to close to Mumbai, you know, I mean, he was
[Guest]: with the defense services, you know, I mean, so I was born there.
[Guest]: And then I came here, I grew up here.
[Guest]: And well, but yes, I am a migrant, just like, just like the Thackerays, you know, I mean,
[Guest]: I am a migrant.
[Guest]: But Maharashtra government, particularly, I don't know whether this is true about other
[Guest]: states, it considers that if you have lived in Maharashtra continuously for 20 years,
[Guest]: you have to be regarded as a native, you are a regular Maharashtrian, you know, I mean,
[Guest]: so by that definition, I am a Maharashtrian, I'm an honorary Maharashtrian.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I really enjoyed reading both your books, especially in Maharashtra Maximus,
[Amit Varma]: which has come out recently is especially fascinating, because it sort of puts the fault
[Amit Varma]: lines in current Maharashtra politics in very sharp historical perspective.
[Amit Varma]: For example, you know, when people talk about contemporary politics, they'll talk about
[Amit Varma]: the Brahmins versus Marathas and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And reading your book, I realized that this is a fault line that is not something that
[Amit Varma]: only in modern politics, it goes back hundreds of years.
[Amit Varma]: Tell us a little bit more about that, about, you know, the schism between the two that
[Amit Varma]: sort of happened when the Peshwas took over from Shivaji.
[Guest]: Yeah, now, Shivaji was a Maratha warrior king, and his son, Sambhaji, and grandson, Shahu
[Guest]: Maharaj.
[Guest]: You know, until then, it was the Bhosle dynasty, which had a tight grip on Maharashtra.
[Guest]: But right from the times of Shivaji, Vishwanath Ballal was their Peshwa, their prime minister.
[Guest]: And after that, after Shahuji, there was a split in the family.
[Guest]: They were two sons, you know, I mean, there were two branches of the family.
[Guest]: Tara Bai, who was the second wife, you know, she wanted the inheritance for her son, Rajaram.
[Guest]: And of course, Shahu Maharaj was under the custody of Aurangzeb.
[Guest]: Aurangzeb had kidnapped him and his mother.
[Guest]: Then he got released, and he came and he sat on the throne.
[Guest]: But by that time, there was a split in the dynasty.
[Guest]: So there was one branch ruling out of Kolhapur, and one branch ruling out of Satara.
[Guest]: Now the Peshwas, the prime ministers, the Ballal family, they took advantage of this.
[Guest]: And while they ruled in the name of the Maratha kings, they were the actual warriors.
[Guest]: Now they were Brahmins, and they were not a warrior caste.
[Guest]: For those centuries, for those days, you know, I mean, they were not expected to go into
[Guest]: the battlefield.
[Guest]: But Bajirao particularly, Bajirao Ballal, he is one general who never lost a battle,
[Guest]: who never lost a war.
[Guest]: He died early, but he never lost a war.
[Guest]: And of course, the Marathas had a very guerrilla kind of fighting, you know, they never used
[Guest]: to have open battles, which is why the first open battle that they ever had, which was
[Guest]: the Panipat in 1761.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, they lost that war, because they really could not fight that on open ground.
[Guest]: And but until Bajirao was alive, he never lost a single war.
[Guest]: And the Marathas, when we refer to Marathas, we also mean the Peshwas.
[Guest]: But this Maratha Peshwa dynasty, I mean, that war that they lost, the battle of the war
[Guest]: of Panipat that they lost, it pushed them back by a whole generation.
[Guest]: 20-25 years, they could not do anything.
[Guest]: Then gradually, gradually the succeeding dynasties by that time, Shivaji's descendants were just
[Guest]: rubber stamps, if I may put it like that, you know, I mean, they were just putting the
[Guest]: mohary on all the decisions of the Peshwas.
[Guest]: And the inheritors of Bajirao Ballal, the heirs of Bajirao Ballal, they gradually built
[Guest]: up the dynasty again.
[Guest]: But they were a weakened lot and there was a lot of infighting amongst them after Bajirao's
[Guest]: death, you know, his brother, his nephews, everybody, they wanted a piece of the cake
[Guest]: and things like that.
[Guest]: So the dynasty was highly weakened.
[Guest]: And if you go back in history, Charles Metcalfe, Lord Charles Metcalfe, who was the governor
[Guest]: of Bombay, I think he had said that there are only two ruling powers in India.
[Guest]: One is the British and the other are Marathas.
[Guest]: And every territory they cede, we occupy and every territory we occupy is ceded to us by
[Guest]: the Marathas.
[Guest]: So they were really ruling from north to south, from east to west, everywhere there was a
[Guest]: Maratha presence and they had gone as far back as Peshawar.
[Guest]: And I believe that if they had not lost the Battle of Panipat, if they had not lost the
[Guest]: War of Panipat, maybe we would not have had a partition of India also, because there would
[Guest]: have been a Maratha rule over there.
[Guest]: And we may not have had the partition of Bengal, because again, there would have been Maratha
[Guest]: domination over there.
[Guest]: But Marathas were pushed back from all the edges.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, this is very interesting.
[Amit Varma]: Like again, bound by, you know, what we know of present day geography, people don't often
[Amit Varma]: realize how large the Maratha Empire was at its peak, like you point out from Peshawar
[Amit Varma]: to Tanjore and all the way to Bengal in the east and Gujarat in the west.
[Amit Varma]: Another interesting phrase I picked up from your book, like I've spoken to many historians
[Amit Varma]: on the show and some of them have told me about how Shivaji's sort of kind of nationalism
[Amit Varma]: was an early version of the sort of Hindutva nationalism that we see today.
[Amit Varma]: And in your book, I learned the phrase Maharashtra dharma.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll quote from your book where you say, quote, Maharashtra dharma simplified for those
[Amit Varma]: unfamiliar with the term, meant not just Hindu dharma, but also nationalism.
[Amit Varma]: It manifested in 17th century India in various ways, such as a protection of the cow, protection
[Amit Varma]: of Brahmins, a fight for independence from Muslim kings, and an attempt to restore morality
[Amit Varma]: in Indian Hindu society, which many felt had been destroyed by the Islamic rulers, stop
[Amit Varma]: quote.
[Amit Varma]: I almost feel like this is, you know, like, it's the same, right?
[Guest]: In a sense.
[Guest]: Yes, it is.
[Guest]: And I received a lot of flack for writing that, you know, I mean, and people could not
[Guest]: accept there were lots of arguments, you know, during my book launch, etc, you know, saying
[Guest]: that they didn't agree with this.
[Guest]: But you know, see, Shivaji had a royal saint, you know, all kings have their own resident
[Guest]: saints and all that, which was Ram Dass.
[Guest]: And it was Ram Dass's campaign to restore all these old traditional ancient values,
[Guest]: etc.
[Guest]: But Shivaji on his own, one must accept, you know, I mean, his closest generals, his most
[Guest]: trusted generals were Muslims, his bodyguard was a Muslim.
[Guest]: And when he went out to meet Afzal Khan, you know, it was a Muslim bodyguard who warned
[Guest]: him that there is some conspiracy afoot and you better be careful because they might be
[Guest]: killing you.
[Guest]: And Afzal Khan's conspirator was a Maharashtrian Brahmin.
[Guest]: So there were really no straight lines dividing the Muslims from the Hindus.
[Guest]: But yes, they wanted their cultural values to be restored.
[Guest]: And Shivaji's campaign was for a Hindvi Swaraj.
[Guest]: That means an Indian self-rule, not like Hindutva Vadi, not exactly the Hindutva Vadi that we
[Guest]: are facing today.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, today it is only majoritarianism, it is only Hindutva, which is where I distinguish
[Guest]: today in modern day also, I distinguish Hinduism from Hindutva, you know, I mean, which is
[Guest]: very different.
[Guest]: Hindutva is a political philosophy, is a political philosophy and Hinduism is a religion.
[Guest]: But Chhatrapati Shivaji had no problems taking advice from Muslim generals, having Muslim
[Guest]: generals in his army, they used to lead him into battle, etc.
[Guest]: So there was no communal divide at that point of time.
[Amit Varma]: You know, it's interesting that obviously Hindutva, like you correctly said, is a sort
[Amit Varma]: of a political philosophy that the way I had understood it goes back to the early 20th
[Amit Varma]: century is basically Savarkar, RSS, Gita Press, all of that happening in the 1910s, 1920s,
[Amit Varma]: around that period.
[Amit Varma]: So I was sort of very intrigued to find earlier articulations of it, such as sort of Shivaji's
[Amit Varma]: muscular nationalism.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess even as Hindvi Swaraj, the way he understood it, self-rule by the people
[Amit Varma]: here excluded the Mughal rulers and the Islamic rulers from that, from his understanding of
[Amit Varma]: what, you know, what our nation is, right?
[Guest]: You know, Shivaji was in Pune, you know, he inherited a patch of land from his father
[Guest]: in Pune, which then one of his, what do you say, Acharyas, I could say, you know, I mean,
[Guest]: he helped him because Shivaji was a child at that point of time and Shivaji's father
[Guest]: was also separated from his mother.
[Guest]: He was married a second time and he was with the Islamic kingdoms in the south, in the
[Guest]: Deccan, you know, he was a general in that kingdom.
[Guest]: And Shivaji was quashed between Mughals in the north and these Deccan Islamic kingdoms
[Guest]: in the south.
[Guest]: And he was in Pune, which was a really wild patch of land.
[Guest]: There were wolves, there were hyenas in what we know as Pune today.
[Guest]: And a reward was given, you know, people said that if you can come and you can clear this
[Guest]: patch of the hyenas and wolves and everything, we will set up a kingdom here.
[Guest]: So a lot of farmers came and cleared that place, etc.
[Guest]: And then he set up his kingdom over there.
[Guest]: And he had a very difficult task, you know, I mean, squashed between these two sides.
[Guest]: But then he did make friends with the Deccan Islamic kingdoms.
[Guest]: Even if they were not very good friends, you know, they had an understanding, they had
[Guest]: a military understanding.
[Guest]: But the Mughals were really enemies because, you know, they kidnapped him.
[Guest]: And even there, Raja Jai Singh, who was sent to kidnap Shivaji, he was a Rajput, he was
[Guest]: a Hindu Rajput and he was working on behalf of Aurangzeb.
[Guest]: And Aurangzeb kidnapped him, kept him in the Agra fort, etc.
[Guest]: He escaped from there, you know.
[Guest]: So there was a big history between him and Aurangzeb and then Sambhaji, his son and Aurangzeb,
[Guest]: etc.
[Guest]: Sambhaji was put to death by Aurangzeb.
[Amit Varma]: And reportedly one of the reasons was he refused to name the Mughals who helped him.
[Guest]: Yes, the collaborators, including Aurangzeb's son, who was in Sambhaji's army.
[Guest]: You know, he refused to give away his position.
[Guest]: And Sambhaji's position was given away by a Maratha general, you know, the More family.
[Guest]: So these things, you know, are, what do you say, they're not etched in sharp black and
[Guest]: white lines, you know, I mean, it keeps moving between various things.
[Amit Varma]: No, it's very interesting.
[Amit Varma]: And there also you see traces of what you see in contemporary politics, where no matter
[Amit Varma]: how strongly an ideology is stated, eventually you make friends and enemies of convenience.
[Guest]: Yes, yes, you do.
[Guest]: And you know, that way Balasaheb Thackeray is seen as a very sharp, vicious, violent
[Guest]: Hindutva wadi.
[Guest]: But it is interesting that his party was set up in 1966.
[Guest]: And the first time that he sort of won the municipal corporation elections, he won it
[Guest]: on the issue of Vande Mataram.
[Guest]: Because that time, right from then, a Muslim corporator from the Congress had said that
[Guest]: I cannot sing Vande Mataram.
[Guest]: And Thackeray was looking for this issue to go to the polls.
[Guest]: And so he just seized on Vande Mataram.
[Guest]: And he had a very vicious campaign against the Muslims.
[Guest]: But still he did not win a majority in the BMC.
[Guest]: And now to form a standing committee, he needed the support of two or three more corporators.
[Guest]: Who do you think he goes to?
[Guest]: He goes to GM Banatwala of the Indian Union Muslim League.
[Guest]: You know, you have just fought against that party.
[Guest]: You have called them names, but neither Banatwala nor Bal Thackeray have any problem joining
[Guest]: hands and becoming part of the standing committee.
[Guest]: And this kind of a thing has now continued into this century, into this decade.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, anybody who thinks it is politically convenient.
[Guest]: Years ago, I had Madhavrao Sindhia.
[Guest]: The late Madhavrao Sindhia used to be the General Secretary in charge of Maharashtra.
[Guest]: And it was Vajpayee's government in the center.
[Guest]: So then I had said that, well, if they don't prove a majority, then they will have to resign
[Guest]: and there will be elections.
[Guest]: So he said, I don't have any hopes of that, you know, because they will break the other
[Guest]: political parties and anybody, you know, who's getting a little slice of power will go with
[Guest]: them.
[Guest]: And so I said, what about ideology?
[Guest]: So he said, ideology doesn't matter.
[Guest]: It is only power that matters.
[Guest]: So that is exactly what is happening even today.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, another interesting example of Thackeray, and of course, we'll speak about him more
[Amit Varma]: later in this episode, is he had the India Pakistan match stopped where he had the pitch
[Unknown]: at Wankhede dug up in 91.
[Amit Varma]: And yet, not long after that, he's hanging out with Javed Mian Dada and saying, oh, don't
[Amit Varma]: worry, we'll have more matches here and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So in private, it's one thing in public, another thing and let's kind of sort of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: go back into history and sort of talk about, you know, the birth of the shaping of Bombay
[Amit Varma]: itself.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, like it's very interesting, like, you know, you had a lot of nativist claims
[Amit Varma]: made about Bombay in the last few decades by Thackeray and others, but the interesting
[Amit Varma]: thing about Bombay is that its origin is actually very syncretic.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, it was basically two islands owned by Sultan Muhammad Shah.
[Amit Varma]: He gives that to the Portuguese.
[Amit Varma]: The Portuguese give it as dowry to the British when Prince Charles marries Catherine of Braganza
[Amit Varma]: in 1662.
[Amit Varma]: And then the British don't really know what to do there.
[Amit Varma]: And there are, you know, Kohli fishermen on those islands and there's not much, but then
[Amit Varma]: it becomes a good port for shipping cotton and they set up cotton mills and Bombay becomes,
[Amit Varma]: as you point out, a mini Manchester of the East.
[Amit Varma]: And what happens interestingly there is that all the migrant labor brought in is from other
[Amit Varma]: rural parts of Maharashtra and from elsewhere.
[Amit Varma]: So it isn't as if the original ingredients were necessarily Marathi.
[Guest]: It's just a mix of all of these.
[Guest]: Yes, it is a mix.
[Guest]: You know, see Surat was a port right from Mughal times.
[Guest]: You know, they used to sail their ships from there, they had to go to Hajj etc.
[Guest]: So they used to sail from Surat.
[Guest]: And the British also used Surat, Portuguese also used that port, Dutch also used that
[Guest]: port.
[Guest]: But then the British came into these seven islands of Bombay and they joined them together
[Guest]: and they realized this strategically it was a very good port for military purposes and
[Guest]: also for commercial purposes.
[Guest]: So when the importance shifted from Surat and Porbandar to Bombay, then there were a
[Guest]: lot of Gujarati, Hindu, Jain, Sindhis, Marwadis, Bora Muslims, Parsis etc.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, shifting quickly towards Bombay and they were amongst the first ones
[Guest]: to set up the textile mills etc.
[Guest]: And all said and done, yes, there were these Kohli fishermen and there was a migrant labor
[Guest]: from interior of Maharashtra.
[Guest]: But Bombay was actually built up by the Gujaratis, which is the core of the fight between the
[Guest]: Maharashtrians and the Gujaratis at the moment.
[Guest]: So when after independence, this became a Bombay state, it was a bilingual state, Parsi
[Guest]: Saurashtra and Kutch were in Bombay state.
[Guest]: And you know, the first chief minister of Bombay state was a Maharashtrian, but Muraji
[Guest]: Desai was the second chief minister.
[Guest]: And there were these, you know, we talk about the Gujarati duo at the moment, you know,
[Guest]: Narendra Modi and Amit Shah, but there was also a Gujarati duo in the 50s, you know,
[Guest]: I mean, which was Vallabhbhai Patel and Muraji Desai, you know, who were accused of having
[Guest]: overdue influence on Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru.
[Guest]: And Nehru preferred to listen to Sardar Patel and to Muraji Desai rather than to YB Chavan
[Guest]: and the other Maharashtrian leaders.
[Guest]: And there was this movement, you know, I mean, for separating the two and all the Maharashtrian
[Guest]: leaders complained that whatever the funds are allocated to the Bombay state, these strong
[Guest]: Gujarati leaders divert that towards Saurashtra and Kutch.
[Guest]: We don't get anything.
[Guest]: Western Maharashtra doesn't get anything.
[Guest]: Vidarbha at that point of time was with Madhya Pradesh, with Mahakosha and Marathwada was
[Guest]: still with the Nizam of Hyderabad.
[Guest]: It was part of Hyderabad state.
[Guest]: So Western Maharashtra and Bombay were with Bombay state.
[Guest]: So they say, we don't get any funds, you know, all the funds are diverted towards Saurashtra
[Guest]: and Kutch.
[Guest]: So they started a movement incidentally, Bal Thackeray's father was also a big part of
[Guest]: that movement and they started and then the Congress in those days who did not have any
[Guest]: competition, began to lose a lot of votes, you know, I mean, they began to lose a lot
[Guest]: of seats and it went to all Chutput parties, I would say, you know, I mean, like Sayukta
[Guest]: Maharashtra Movement Party and Communist Party and things like that.
[Guest]: They were not really very strong parties, but still people prefer to vote against the
[Guest]: Congress.
[Guest]: So Nehru got unnerved and then he gave in to Chavan's exhortation, said, Muraji said
[Guest]: that if you are splitting Bombay state, you know, we want Bombay as our state capital
[Guest]: because we are responsible for building it up the way it is.
[Guest]: But then Nehru conceded and gave Bombay to Maharashtra.
[Guest]: But once Bombay came to Maharashtra, local Maharashtrians discovered that they still
[Guest]: did not have rights in their own state capital.
[Guest]: They were still second class citizens because this was full of South Indians.
[Guest]: If you go and look up the Bombay Municipal Corporation, the list of mayors up to the
[Guest]: 50s and the 60s are all South Indians, Keralites, Tamilians, Kannadigas or Parsis, etc.
[Guest]: There's not a single Maharashtrian.
[Guest]: Gujaratis are also mayors, but not a single Maharashtrian.
[Guest]: And then, you know, in South Bombay, in areas like Girgaon and all those kind of places,
[Guest]: there was a major redevelopment, the kind that is taking place in Muhammad Ali Road,
[Guest]: which is under the Syedna, he's redeveloping the area.
[Guest]: So Maharashtra government had taken a redevelopment and during that redevelopment, much of the
[Guest]: housing went to either the South Indians or the rich Gujaratis.
[Guest]: Nothing came to Maharashtrians.
[Guest]: And this is what bothered Thackeray quite a lot.
[Guest]: You know, and that is how he set up the Shiv Sena saying that if there are jobs going in
[Guest]: Bombay and if there are, he was basically a Bombay based party at that point of time.
[Guest]: And if there is a housing redevelopment, houses have to go to Maharashtrians and jobs have
[Guest]: to go to Maharashtrians.
[Guest]: And that is how the whole, what do you say, it's still cosmopolitan, but it shifted its
[Guest]: focus towards Maharashtrians after that.
[Amit Varma]: No, and in fact, your book, Maharashtra Maximus does a very good job of sort of delineating
[Amit Varma]: the second fault line, the Maharashtrians versus Gujaratis fault line.
[Amit Varma]: Like as you point out, you know, before independence, the British had set up the BMC and you could
[Amit Varma]: only vote if you were a taxpayer.
[Amit Varma]: So the majority of the taxpayers were Gujaratis, Parsis, Boras, Sindhis, because the Maharashtrians
[Amit Varma]: happened to be mostly the migrant labor brought in to work in the mills and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And then even after independence, when you have universal franchise, but still, you know,
[Amit Varma]: as a sort of legacy of the past, your corporators and all that are Gujaratis, Parsis, Boras
[Amit Varma]: and Sindhis, but your bureaucrats are all Tamil and you know, they are running the administration.
[Amit Varma]: And this is, as you point out, what led to the Samyukta Maharashtra movement coming up.
[Amit Varma]: I was struck by this very amusing anecdote, which gave me a sense of how shrill the rhetoric
[Amit Varma]: got, where when Murarji was Chief Minister, like at one point to just give context to
[Amit Varma]: this, you say, I'll quote from your book, quote, the turning point in the agitation
[Amit Varma]: came when he ordered, he being Murarji, ordered the police to fire on a protesting mob at
[Amit Varma]: Flora Fountain, which resulted in the martyring of a hundred and six protesters, a fact that
[Amit Varma]: has not yet been forgotten by the local populace, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously this spilled out in the streets and Maharashtrian leaders, you write, who
[Amit Varma]: were stalwarts of the Samyukta Maharashtra movement, coined this beautiful slogan, Mumbai
[Amit Varma]: aahi aamchi, nahi konachi bappachi.
[Guest]: It doesn't belong to anybody's father.
[Amit Varma]: It belongs to us.
[Guest]: No, it's nobody's father's property.
[Guest]: And Murarji got really very angry with that.
[Guest]: You know, rural Marathi is sometimes very rustic and even Thakre used to speak a bit
[Guest]: like that.
[Guest]: He used to call it Thakri Bhaja, you know, very rough, very rude, very rustic, but they
[Guest]: probably don't mean anything with that.
[Guest]: So Murarji got a little angry about that.
[Guest]: So he said, barah Mumbai tumchi, ata bhandi ghasan aamchi.
[Guest]: That means now you come and scrub our utensils.
[Guest]: What he meant to say is that we are the rich entrepreneurs and you are just domestic servants
[Guest]: in our house.
[Guest]: So that is your place.
[Guest]: And that is what really rattled the Samyukta Maharashtra movement, saying that, you know,
[Guest]: I mean, in our own state, in our own city, you know, I mean, they are making us feel
[Guest]: as second class citizens and then they came out on the streets and Murarji was again,
[Guest]: you know, very hot tempered man.
[Guest]: So he ordered a firing and those 106 people were martyred and the movement never looked
[Guest]: back after that.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, they had to concede Bombay to Maharashtra.
[Amit Varma]: No, in fact, I'm just thinking that if a chief minister today ordered a firing and 106 people
[Amit Varma]: died in Flora Fountain, I mean, it's almost unthinkable.
[Amit Varma]: And so one can sort of imagine how deep the wounds went.
[Amit Varma]: And you also, you sort of point out in your book about how there were all these different
[Amit Varma]: little groupings which were coming up, fighting for the cause of the Marathi people like the
[Amit Varma]: Samyukta Maharashtra movement and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: But what made Bal Thackeray Shiv Sena stand out was his oratory and his ability to draw
[Guest]: the crowds.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: You know, if you have read my book on Bal Thackeray, I have insisted that, you know,
[Guest]: Bal Thackeray is a creature of the Congress, you know, because the Congress leaders also
[Guest]: were rebelling against this, you know, domination of South Indians, domination of Gujaratis,
[Guest]: etc.
[Guest]: They wanted a state for themselves.
[Guest]: And much of what Bal Thackeray said later, you know, speak Marathi in BMC, it did not
[Guest]: come from Shiv Sena or Bal Thackeray.
[Guest]: It came from the Congress leaders.
[Guest]: It came from George Fernandez.
[Guest]: It came from Rinal Gore.
[Guest]: It didn't come from Bal Thackeray because there was this sub-nationalism even in the
[Guest]: Congress leaders.
[Guest]: But they were these Gandhi topiwallas, they were these khadi clad leaders and they could
[Guest]: hardly descend on the streets and they could hardly say that, you know, throughout the
[Guest]: South Indians.
[Guest]: Now, you know, I mean, when the Shiv Sena came to power in 1995, Bal Thackeray in his
[Guest]: first address said that, you know, I mean, we will deny ration cards to North Indians,
[Guest]: migrating North Indians.
[Guest]: By that time, North Indians were migrating in hoards to Mumbai.
[Guest]: But the first claim like that was made by a Sayukta Maharashtra movement legislator
[Guest]: in the assembly saying that we should deny ration cards to South Indians.
[Guest]: We should not allow them.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, they are consuming our water, they are consuming our natural resources,
[Guest]: etc.
[Guest]: So Bal Thackeray only copied those ideas.
[Guest]: However, the Congress could not openly come out and say these kind of things.
[Guest]: So they kind of, you know, I mean, set up Bal Thackeray.
[Guest]: And in those days in the 70s, Shiv Sena used to be known as Vasanth Sena.
[Guest]: After Vasanth Rao Naik, who was the chief minister and Vasanth Dada Patil, who was the
[Guest]: Maharashtra Pradesh Congress president.
[Guest]: So it was a clear indication that, you know, they are the ones who are funding and fueling,
[Guest]: you know, Bal Thackeray's sub-nationalism and his regionalism.
[Guest]: And at that point of time, there was a sharp divide between Maharashtrians on one side,
[Guest]: South Indians, of course, because they were white collar workers, but they were more easily
[Guest]: surmountable.
[Guest]: And the Gujaratis who were the moneybags and the Congress needed the moneybags for themselves,
[Guest]: you know, so they had to be very careful and they had to do it in a very diplomatic fashion.
[Guest]: And Bal Thackeray was their answer to that.
[Amit Varma]: And the tactical element of this is very interesting, because again, another thing people might
[Amit Varma]: not realize today, where the communists have pretty much been decimated everywhere.
[Amit Varma]: But in those days, in the 50s and 60s, the communists were very big.
[Amit Varma]: They were the, you know, the biggest threat in a sense, in a local sense to the Congress.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, they had all the mill workers with them and all that.
[Amit Varma]: So tactically, it made total sense for the Congress to have their so-called D-team, you
[Amit Varma]: know, the Vasanth Sena and then let these guys fight the communists while they can just
[Amit Varma]: sit back and, you know, sort of be the mature party.
[Amit Varma]: Like there's a political concept I think of in this regard, which is the Overton window.
[Amit Varma]: So the Overton window basically is, it's sort of this space within which this linear space
[Amit Varma]: within which there is a window, which constitutes acceptable discourse.
[Amit Varma]: Right?
[Amit Varma]: So for example, if it is drawn along the line of freedom, at one extreme, you have complete
[Amit Varma]: freedom at the other extreme, you have complete authoritarianism.
[Amit Varma]: And in between, there's a window of what the discourse is.
[Amit Varma]: And the Overton window can shift where if one party makes a lot of noise, say in terms
[Amit Varma]: of total freedom, then people who would, the window shifts in that direction.
[Amit Varma]: So people who would otherwise not have been acceptable in the discourse suddenly seem
[Amit Varma]: moderate.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm just sort of thinking aloud, tell me if you agree with this, that what this
[Amit Varma]: also made the Congress, it made the Congress look more mature and more reasonable and almost
[Amit Varma]: like the adults in the room, because you have these two crazies on either side.
[Guest]: Yes, and that is what their intention was.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, they did not want to soil their hands, you know, by getting into this
[Guest]: whole thing and becoming parochial and pushing out other people.
[Guest]: The Constitution allows freedom of movement anywhere in the country and the Congress,
[Guest]: you know, just coming out freshly out of freedom, just 20 years into freedom, they just really
[Guest]: could not do this kind of a thing.
[Guest]: So they set up this maverick, you know, I mean, who was, but how did he get away?
[Guest]: Because you know, there's also a murder case, they murdered a communist leader in Lalbagh.
[Guest]: And then a Shiv Sena man contested that seat, you know, and he became the first legislator
[Guest]: in the Maharashtra Assembly.
[Guest]: How did the Shiv Sena and Bal Thackeray get away with it?
[Guest]: You know, I mean, unless they had the sanction of the authorities, unless the government
[Guest]: was protecting, you know, I mean, he could not have got away with it.
[Guest]: The case is still in court.
[Guest]: It is 40, 50 years.
[Unknown]: This was Dange.
[Amit Varma]: No, Desai, Krishna Desai.
[Guest]: Dange was another person with whom Bal Thackeray, although he was a communist, and Bal Thackeray
[Guest]: was a, what do you say, sharp regionalist.
[Guest]: Dange and Bal Thackeray came together briefly, maybe one or a couple of meetings in Lalbagh.
[Guest]: And then Thackeray never liked to concede second place to anybody.
[Guest]: And Dange also had a great oratory, not in Thackeray's style, but he had a great oratory
[Guest]: with which the mill workers reacted to and listened to and they resonated with it.
[Guest]: So Thackeray did not like the fact that Dange was overshadowing him, you know.
[Guest]: So he promptly dropped that alliance with Dange.
[Amit Varma]: No, and I remember you mentioned this part in your book that, you know, Thackeray calls
[Amit Varma]: him and they give a speech and Dange speaks first.
[Unknown]: And he's so reasonable and yet he gets a crowd with him.
[Unknown]: Thackeray is, of course, you know, a rabble rouser and Thackeray immediately then never
[Amit Varma]: asked.
[Amit Varma]: And the person accused of the Desai murder eventually became a minister in the 95th cabinet.
[Guest]: Yes, yes, yes.
[Guest]: He became a minister and he was not brought to book, you know, I mean, so it could not
[Guest]: have happened without the complicit sanction of the rulers at that time and the rulers
[Amit Varma]: were only the Congress, you know.
[Amit Varma]: And in your book on Thackeray, Hindu Raza Samrat, you've got these very evocative early
[Amit Varma]: sections that give us a glimpse into Thackeray's early resentments, like when he worked at
[Unknown]: the Free Press Journal, for example, R.K.
[Amit Varma]: Lakshman was one of his colleagues and everybody else, all the senior management, the editors
[Unknown]: and all that was South India and they kept referring Lakshman's cartoons to his and he
[Amit Varma]: felt that that was discrimination and his cartoons have been described by various people
[Amit Varma]: as being extremely crude and not quite in the Lakshman class.
[Amit Varma]: But he took that resentment with him almost like a generation earlier and I don't mean
[Amit Varma]: to imply an equivalence, but almost as if, you know, 50 years before that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: Hitler took the knocks he got at art school from the Jews and so on and carried that resentment
[Amit Varma]: all the way through.
[Amit Varma]: My question is, you've known Thackeray pretty well personally as well.
[Amit Varma]: On the one hand, one can say that this was a genuine ideology, that he really felt strongly
[Unknown]: about this, that we Marathis must have our place and he was really committed to that
[Amit Varma]: sub-nationalism.
[Amit Varma]: But then as you also point out, there are so many contradictions in his actions and
[Amit Varma]: his targets keep shifting according to what is tactically feasible at different points
[Amit Varma]: in time from South Indians to Muslims to North Indians later and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So was he a man who had firm beliefs of any kind and ideology of some sort or was he a
[Amit Varma]: political tactician who wanted to be a politician and then just picked whatever niche was most
[Guest]: promising at a given point in time?
[Guest]: No, I think he was a political tactician, you know, he was not committed to any ideology.
[Guest]: Otherwise, he would not have aligned with the Muslim League.
[Guest]: He would not have called for a school or a hospital on the disputed site in Ayodhya,
[Guest]: which he did after participating in the riots post the demolition of the Babri Masjid.
[Guest]: He then later called for a school or a hospital when he realized that the Muslims were voting
[Guest]: for him because Muslims had extended an olive branch.
[Guest]: And you know, I have always insisted that his only ideology was himself.
[Guest]: He did believe in the Marathi Manus.
[Guest]: He did want to get something for them, but there again, if you notice, you know, the
[Guest]: generational change that has happened in the Shiv Sena, he worked with lumpens.
[Guest]: You know, he wanted an army, you know, like one call to the army and, you know, they are
[Guest]: all in the streets, they are flooding the streets and they are causing problems, you
[Guest]: know, they're causing riots, etc.
[Guest]: So he had an interest in keeping them slightly undereducated, you know, I mean, people who
[Guest]: will not turn around and ask questions.
[Guest]: Like, you know, a friend of mine told me that when you join the NDA, they of course, they
[Guest]: fail you if you get three out of ten, but they also fail you if you get eight out of
[Guest]: ten.
[Guest]: So it's between four and seven.
[Guest]: Four and seven, because they don't want you to be too intelligent and ask questions and
[Guest]: question your commanding officers.
[Guest]: So that is what was with Bal Thackeray.
[Guest]: He did not want too educated and too questioning people, you know.
[Guest]: So yes, you know, I mean, moderately educated and then, you know, like with his Lokadikar
[Guest]: Samiti and like with his trade unions, he will come to know that there are jobs opening
[Guest]: up in Air India or Mazgaon docks and, you know, they will be very happy.
[Guest]: Balasaheb got us a job as fitter, loader, turner in all these places.
[Guest]: But they never had any ambition beyond that, you know, I mean, it is only the second generation
[Guest]: which has woken up and realized that they were not qualified, you know, I mean, their
[Guest]: children were not qualified, etc.
[Guest]: Or they were not qualified.
[Guest]: And so they started to send their children to better schools, wanted them to become graduates,
[Guest]: wanted them to speak English and not restrict themselves to Marathi.
[Guest]: I have quoted, you know, someone in my book, Arun Tikkarkar, who was the editor of Lok
[Guest]: Satta.
[Guest]: So he said, Maharashtrian society suffered a generational setback thrice in the past
[Guest]: few centuries.
[Guest]: One was this war of Panipat, which the Peshwas lost, the Marathas lost.
[Guest]: It took them 25 years to come back.
[Guest]: Second was Mahatma Gandhi's assassination by Nathuram Godse.
[Guest]: People did not trust Maharashtrians for a long time after that.
[Guest]: There were very few Maharashtrians in Nehru's cabinet or in Indira Gandhi's cabinet, etc.
[Guest]: They didn't trust Maharashtrians.
[Guest]: And the third was when Bal Thackeray set up the Shiv Sena, you know, because outside of
[Guest]: Maharashtra, everybody got the picture of Maharashtrians as, you know, I mean, wicked,
[Guest]: evil, writers, you know, I mean, they are terrible, you know, I mean, they kill you,
[Guest]: you know, I mean, they don't allow you to seek jobs in the state and things like that,
[Guest]: in which the middle class Maharashtrians hated that picture.
[Guest]: They hated that picture because they knew that they were not like that.
[Guest]: So there was one time when only the lumpens were supporting Bal Thackeray.
[Guest]: But then when Uddhav Thackeray took over the thing, he realized what had happened and he
[Guest]: wanted a better class of Maharashtrians to be supporting the Shiv Sena, to be representing
[Guest]: the Shiv Sena, which is why this change has taken place, you know, I mean, and also the
[Guest]: government that we have got, it is essentially because the Shiv Sena has stopped being the
[Guest]: kind of violent party, you know, okay, fine, it is saying Hindutva, it is asking for the
[Guest]: Ram temple, but they have managed to keep that on the back burner.
[Guest]: And they managed to form a government essentially because they are nonviolent and they believe
[Guest]: in the constitution.
[Guest]: Bal Thackeray never believed in the constitution or in nonviolence.
[Amit Varma]: No, and in fact, another thing I realized while reading your book is the key shifts
[Amit Varma]: in the Shiv Sena, like we see that when it starts, a lot of the people who are with Thackeray
[Amit Varma]: are actually educated people who are reading because he started this magazine called Marmik,
[Amit Varma]: as you point out, and they're all educated middle class Maharashtrians who are sort of
[Amit Varma]: with the movement.
[Amit Varma]: And then he goes completely the lumpen way and the rowdies sort of take over the party
[Unknown]: and that's happening through the 70s into the late 70s.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, that earlier the thinking rationalist educated middle class kind of goes away from
[Amit Varma]: him and it becomes a party of lumpens.
[Amit Varma]: And you've got this very evocative chapter in your book called Marathi Manus, which in
[Amit Varma]: fact I first read as a Kindle single.
[Unknown]: It was I think released on its own.
[Amit Varma]: And it's also there on juggernaut on its own, I think.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll link that from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: And that describes it very evocatively how, because he would get these menial jobs for
[Amit Varma]: his Shiv Sena foot soldiers through the use of force and all that, that there'll be factory
[Amit Varma]: watchmen and there'll be, you know, jobs of that sort, that there wasn't a stress on education
[Amit Varma]: and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And because of that, an entire generation lost those opportunities and they just kind
[Amit Varma]: of went forever.
[Amit Varma]: And the interesting thing is that in that particular case, normally politicians don't
[Amit Varma]: walk the talk, but in that particular case, even his, the kids of his own family, Uddhav
[Guest]: and Raj didn't really have a great education in the sense they went.
[Guest]: No, they didn't.
[Guest]: That is one thing you have to give credit to Thackeray.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, he imposed me Marathi and he imposed, you know, I'm in Marathi medium.
[Guest]: So he sent his children to those kinds of schools.
[Guest]: Today they feel handicapped.
[Guest]: They feel handicapped, which is why they have sent their children to Bombay's courtesans
[Guest]: and Xavier's and things like that.
[Guest]: And I think Rashmi and Uddhav Thackeray are very proud of Aditya Thackeray that he's able
[Guest]: to hold his own.
[Guest]: He's part of the Pathri crowd.
[Guest]: He's part of the bold and beautiful, which they were never able to do.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, because not only that, you know, I mean, Uddhav and Raj were not really
[Guest]: educated in that sense, but, but, you know, I mean, they were also seen as such, you know,
[Guest]: I mean, in the sense, you know, these are not the kind of people we want to associate
[Guest]: with, because they are violent, they beat up people.
[Guest]: And even, even middle class Maharashtrians didn't want to do it.
[Guest]: Forget about North Indians and South Indians and other people, they didn't want to do it.
[Guest]: So it has been a conscious shift in the Shiv Sena.
[Guest]: And in that chapter, which you just quoted, I have a story about this person who's now
[Guest]: a very top ranking PR person.
[Guest]: And he was living in Lalbagh and his mother was in, was teaching English in a government
[Guest]: school, in a government or a municipal school.
[Guest]: But, you know, long before Thackeray's policy of Me Marathi, she wanted her children to
[Guest]: learn the mother tongue.
[Guest]: So she put her children into Marathi medium schools, initially, you know, primary, etc.
[Guest]: But whenever they wanted to read English books, you know, she always went to the library and
[Guest]: got them, you know, so she got them Shakespeare, she got them Banerjee, etc.
[Guest]: And as these children grew up, they began more interested in reading English literature,
[Guest]: etc.
[Guest]: And then they began to question and Lalbagh was really right in the heart of the Shiv
[Guest]: Sena fortress, you know.
[Guest]: So this particular person began to question Thackeray's parochial policies and he got
[Guest]: beaten up, right, royally by all the Shiv Sena supporters, etc.
[Guest]: Every time he used to get beaten up whenever he used to ask questions, but then he got
[Guest]: a job.
[Guest]: First he became a journalist, then he moved into PR.
[Guest]: And now he lives in a huge flat and he facing the sea.
[Guest]: And he has about two or three cars parked in his basement, etc.
[Guest]: And then he told me that, you know, I mean, I'm still friends with those people that I
[Guest]: grew up with.
[Guest]: And then I invite them home and then they come and then they look at my cars and then
[Guest]: they look at my house and they look at the sea facing window, etc.
[Guest]: And they don't say anything.
[Guest]: And even I don't say anything, although I want to tell them, I tell you so.
[Guest]: And I want to tell them that, you know, around the time when you were lending your muscle
[Guest]: to Bal Thackeray, I was sitting in the libraries of Mumbai reading Shakespeare in Burnet Shaw.
[Guest]: And getting mocked for it.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Which is why I'm here and you are where you are, you know, I mean, so that, that's
[Guest]: that difference has been understood by the second generation of Shiv Senik.
[Guest]: So they don't want that.
[Guest]: And if you remember, I don't know whether you were in Bombay that time.
[Guest]: There was a time, you know, when the Shiv Seniks used to go to all these convent schools,
[Guest]: you know, St. Anne's, Don Bosco, etc.
[Guest]: And they used to beat up the fathers and the nuns, etc., because they wanted their children
[Guest]: to be admitted to those schools.
[Guest]: And these missionary schools, you know, they have a very strict thing, you know, I mean,
[Guest]: and they also put a lot of weightage on their parents.
[Guest]: Are your parents educated, are your parents speaking English, you know, I mean, are they
[Guest]: capable of doing your homework?
[Guest]: I mean, helping you do your homework, etc.
[Amit Varma]: Do they beat up the teachers?
[Guest]: Yeah, because you are not admitting, you're not admitting, you know, I mean, that kind
[Guest]: of a thing.
[Guest]: And then the Archdiocese, you know, they passed a law saying that we are not going to listen
[Guest]: to politicians.
[Guest]: I mean, we are not going to admit politician children just because they are, you know,
[Guest]: I mean, they are politicians' children, they have to come here on merit.
[Guest]: You know, the parents have to come and they have to answer the same questions.
[Guest]: And when they realize that they're not getting admission in these schools, then they shifted
[Guest]: to certain other schools like, you know, Bombay Scottish, which doesn't have that kind of
[Guest]: a rule, you know, it is not run by missionaries, etc., you know, American International, they
[Guest]: send their children to those schools, but they definitely got them a proper education.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And it's interesting that you also talk about like the second interesting shift that happens,
[Amit Varma]: like one is, of course, a shift to the Shiv Sena in the late 70s becoming this lumpen
[Amit Varma]: party.
[Amit Varma]: And the other shift is after they come to power in 95, they get drunk on power and your
[Amit Varma]: common Shiv Sena foot soldiers are doing extortions and taking money from common people.
[Amit Varma]: At one point, you write in your book that people stopped buying cars or doing any kind
[Guest]: of conspicuous consumption.
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: And then that changed.
[Guest]: Yeah, but that essentially changed because people reacted to that.
[Guest]: This was between 96 and 98.
[Guest]: Even people like doctors and lawyers and professionals like that, they were dressing down, they would
[Guest]: probably drive in a Maruti 800 instead of a Mercedes Benz and things like that, because
[Guest]: they knew that they were under the focus of all the shakha pramukhs, etc.
[Guest]: You know, it got so bad because the Shiv Sena has got this labor unions in five star hotels,
[Guest]: in hospitals also.
[Guest]: So even if a heart patient was admitted to hospital and he went in for heart surgery,
[Guest]: and after that, the doctor would get an extortionist call, and even the patient would get an extortionist
[Guest]: call.
[Guest]: They'd say, we know that you paid so many lakhs for this operation.
[Guest]: And then they would tell the doctor that we know that you earn so many lakhs, so you can
[Guest]: afford to pay us this much, etc.
[Guest]: It became really, really, very bad.
[Guest]: And then it came to businessmen also, you know, I mean, these businessmen who had wanted
[Guest]: to support the Shiv Sena, etc.
[Guest]: So at that point of time, I think it was in 98, that they all got together and they held
[Guest]: a meeting at Chowpatty.
[Guest]: And then they said, enough is enough.
[Guest]: We are not going to stand this nonsense.
[Guest]: And they got a lot of support from the police commissioner at that time, etc.
[Guest]: Because even the police commissioner was sick and tired of all those extortionist calls
[Guest]: and extortionist complaints and things like that.
[Guest]: So they got together and they said, we are not going to pay you a single Naya Paisa.
[Guest]: Not only that, you know, I mean, businessmen going to Thackeray's house, you know, in posh
[Guest]: cars would have to leave the keys there and come back without their cars, you know, I
[Guest]: mean, so they would always go there in taxis.
[Guest]: And you never knew, you know, there would be something like, you know, Thackeray is
[Guest]: passing by someplace.
[Guest]: He's going to somebody's house and he sees this cake shop.
[Guest]: He gets into the cake shop and he pays and he buys the cake to take it somewhere.
[Guest]: But after that, there would be a line of Shirseniks for days and days saying that we want this
[Guest]: cake, we want this pastry, etc.
[Guest]: And they would just walk away with it without anything, you know.
[Guest]: I mean, so this kind of thing used to happen.
[Guest]: And then they all got together and they said, enough is enough.
[Guest]: We are not going to pay you a single thing.
[Guest]: And then Thackeray realized that he was in danger.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, if he lost the popular support and also he lost the support of people who
[Guest]: were donating to his party, I mean, proper donations to his party, then he would be in
[Guest]: trouble.
[Guest]: But having said that, I have to say that the Shiv Sena in Thackeray's time always had three
[Guest]: kinds of Shirseniks.
[Guest]: If I may say so, I mentioned it in my book also.
[Guest]: One was the pure extortionist.
[Guest]: You know, he would go and he would extort.
[Guest]: You know, somebody told me that every other political party, the political leader collects
[Guest]: money at the top and passes it down to the workers.
[Guest]: Shiv Sena was the only party where the workers collected it from the bottom and passed it
[Guest]: on to Thackeray.
[Guest]: You know, but Thackeray, knowing that he could not walk into those shops himself and extort
[Guest]: the money from them, he would pass on 20 percent of the collections to his Shiv Seniks, which
[Guest]: is how they went from slums to chawls to flats to high rises to bungalows in some place or
[Guest]: dada.
[Guest]: And they were very grateful to Thackeray because, you know, I mean, they said he shares it.
[Guest]: He shares it with us because they know that they cannot extort in their own name.
[Guest]: If they go and walk into a shop, nobody is going to pay them a second look.
[Guest]: They're not going to give them a second look.
[Guest]: So that was pure extortionism.
[Guest]: Then there were those who believed in violence along with extortion.
[Guest]: You know, if you resisted, then they would be violent.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, and they were the more dangerous ones.
[Guest]: And then there was a third one who was there only for Marathi asmita, Marathi pride, Marathi
[Guest]: ethos.
[Guest]: They are the ones who got really tired of this kind of a thing, extortion and extortion
[Guest]: and violence.
[Guest]: And then, you know, Sharad Pawar broke the Congress in 1978 and he formed his own regional
[Guest]: party and this Marathi ethos people all shifted to Sharad Pawar.
[Guest]: So Thackeray lost a lot of his base at that point of time.
[Guest]: The middle class intellectual Maharashtrian just shifted away from the Shiv Sena and went
[Guest]: to the Congress.
[Guest]: It would take another eight years for Sharad Pawar to rejoin Congress.
[Guest]: And then those people who didn't like Congress, they shifted base back to Shiv Sena.
[Guest]: But by that time Thackeray had learnt his lesson.
[Guest]: He knew that he could not be a pure extortionist and pure violent party.
[Amit Varma]: No, I always think of political parties as sort of rival mafias, which are basically
[Amit Varma]: just fighting for, you know, that period in time when you get the monopoly to power your
[Amit Varma]: the state.
[Amit Varma]: But the thing is, even if you steal public money, there's a subtle way to do it, which
[Amit Varma]: is you form the government and you steal public money in so many ways.
[Amit Varma]: And there is the unsubtle crass way of doing it, which is, I guess, what Shiv Sena are
[Amit Varma]: getting carried away and new to the business of politics.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you could call them a nouveau mafia and they did for that period in time.
[Amit Varma]: And then they also changed.
[Amit Varma]: And let's kind of talk about Sharad Pawar a bit, because what is also very interesting
[Amit Varma]: is that back in Thackeray's early days when he was in the Free Press Journal, Sharad Pawar
[Guest]: used to hang out with him.
[Guest]: Yes, Sharad Pawar used to hang out with him and he sapped in all the meetings and discussions
[Guest]: that happened about the formation of the Shiv Sena.
[Guest]: They used to sit somewhere in Elphinstone College.
[Guest]: They used to hire a hall and sit in Elphinstone College.
[Guest]: And there was, you know, I have mentioned in the book also that it is the industrialists
[Guest]: of Bombay, along with the Congress politicians who had an interest in seeing the formation
[Guest]: of the Shiv Sena so that they could use this kind of this army of lumpens, you know, I
[Guest]: mean, to get what they couldn't through the usual routes.
[Guest]: So Sharad Pawar was a youth Congress leader at that point of time.
[Guest]: And although he may not admit it, I'm convinced, you know, I mean, that he was asked by some
[Guest]: of the senior leaders, most probably the Chief Minister of Maharashtra at that time, Vasant
[Guest]: Rao Naik, you know, I mean, to sit in on those meetings and guide Thackeray into it.
[Guest]: And there used to be a secretary of Ramkrishna Bajaj also who used to be sitting in on those
[Guest]: meetings.
[Guest]: So, you know, whether he had a real big role in the formation of the Shiv Sena, one cannot
[Guest]: say, but he definitely sat there and he guided Thackeray.
[Guest]: And they have been friends from that time, you know, I mean, everybody thinks that and
[Guest]: I have mentioned, you know, that they are bitter political rivals, but in private life,
[Amit Varma]: they are the best private friends.
[Amit Varma]: And there were at certain points, there was an overlap between the voters that they were
[Guest]: competing for, which is basically the Marathas.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: Yes, Marathas in the sense, you know, I mean, Thackeray never really had, although he is
[Guest]: based his party on Shivaji and, you know, on his name, he never really had Maratha Marathas
[Guest]: in that sense.
[Guest]: The Maratha vote was always with the Congress and later the NCP.
[Guest]: And then it shifted to the BJP for certain political reasons.
[Guest]: But a lot of, you know, the ones who believed in Marathi ethos, Marathi pride, and those
[Guest]: are the ones, you know, Sharad Pawar had been the chief minister in 78, then again in 88
[Guest]: and then again in 90.
[Guest]: And you know, he acquired the reputation of being a great administrator.
[Guest]: And I wouldn't call him a visionary in the sense of Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, but you
[Guest]: know, he definitely was farsighted.
[Guest]: He saw many things, you know.
[Guest]: So Maharashtrians prefer to, what do you say, identify with him rather than Bal Thackeray.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, the more educated, the more soft spoken, the more, what do you say, knowledgeable.
[Guest]: And Sharad Pawar is not very good at hype and beating his own, blowing his own trumpet.
[Guest]: But he has done a lot more for the people in the villages and rural areas and particularly
[Guest]: his constituency.
[Guest]: And people wanted to associate with him rather than Bal Thackeray.
[Guest]: Ajit Pawar, his nephew, once had said, you know, what has Bal Thackeray done for the
[Guest]: people of Maharashtra?
[Guest]: Has he set up a single educational institution?
[Guest]: Has he set up a single sugar factory?
[Guest]: Or has he set up anything else that is benefiting the common people of Maharashtra?
[Guest]: He's only been doing for himself, himself.
[Guest]: You know, he's been just, you know, he's been building a house, he's been building something
[Guest]: and, you know, I mean, he's been doing nothing for the people, which is true also.
[Amit Varma]: In your book, you quote him as saying all he's done is built a house with 27 air conditioners.
[Guest]: Yes, there were 27 air conditioners in his house, you know.
[Guest]: So, and which is really true.
[Guest]: He never did anything for the Maharashtrian people.
[Guest]: He never thought about it.
[Guest]: He didn't set up a hospital.
[Guest]: He didn't set up a school.
[Guest]: He didn't do anything.
[Guest]: Sharad Pawar has done much of it, you know, although it is under the radar.
[Guest]: He doesn't tom-tom and he doesn't blow his own trumpet.
[Guest]: But Maharashtrian, middle class Maharashtrian intellectuals wanted to identify more with
[Guest]: Sharad Pawar at that time, than with Bal Thackeray.
[Guest]: And until he rejoined the Congress, because you know, these people, some of these people,
[Guest]: they don't like the Congress.
[Guest]: They have never liked the Congress from the beginning.
[Guest]: And they always wanted an alternative.
[Guest]: So they thought that they were getting an alternative in Bal Thackeray, when they realized
[Guest]: how violent and extortionist that party was and that they were not like that and they
[Guest]: didn't endorse that.
[Guest]: They shifted to Sharad Pawar when he formed the Congress.
[Guest]: When he came back to the Congress, many of them shifted back to the Shiv Sena.
[Guest]: By that time, the BJP was also kind of in alliance with the Shiv Sena.
[Guest]: And if you notice, every other regional party, whether it is Telugu Desam in Andhra Pradesh
[Guest]: or Ahom Ganapareesh in Assam, or even Trinamool Congress and Maya Vati, Mulayam Singh Yadav,
[Guest]: all of them have come to power in their respective states within five years of their existence.
[Guest]: You know, they formed a political party, maybe five years or at the most, the next term,
[Guest]: sixth year, seventh year, they have come to power.
[Guest]: Shiv Sena is the only party which took 30 years to come to power in Maharashtra.
[Guest]: And that too only in alliance with the BJP.
[Guest]: Because you know, they didn't look upon themselves as a political party and governing Maharashtra
[Guest]: was never their intention.
[Guest]: Like I said, they were just extortionists.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, they were collecting left, right and center.
[Guest]: That is all that they were interested in.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, and Bal Thackeray was only interested in himself.
[Guest]: He was not interested in anything else.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, I would endorse Ajit Pawar that he never did anything for the people
[Guest]: of Maharashtra.
[Amit Varma]: No, and it's very interesting.
[Amit Varma]: Like in your book, you point out how one point of disillusionment and obviously there was
[Amit Varma]: a sense among many people that they're a B team of the Congress and the Congress is running
[Amit Varma]: them.
[Amit Varma]: But one major disillusionment came in 75 when Thackeray went on TV to support the emergency
[Amit Varma]: after earlier having come out against it.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: And that is also because, you know, I mean, he was forced.
[Guest]: S.B.
[Guest]: Chavan was the chief minister and they sent a posse of policemen to Matushree.
[Guest]: And you know, Thackeray wanted to protect his magazine, Marmic.
[Guest]: And all journals were being shut down at that point of time.
[Guest]: He didn't want that to happen.
[Guest]: So they gave him a choice, you know, I mean, saying that, you know, either you come with
[Guest]: us to Doordarshan and support the emergency or else we are taking you to jail and you
[Guest]: will be shutting down Marmic.
[Guest]: You know, so they gave him half an hour.
[Guest]: He came out in 10 minutes and said, come, let's go to Doordarshan.
[Guest]: And they shut down Marmic anyway.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Later on, you know, I mean, so never trust the devil, as they say, you know, I mean,
[Guest]: never believe in it.
[Guest]: But he wanted to protect Marmic and he was also afraid of jail, you know, because once
[Guest]: he went to jail for three months in 1969 during the, you know, the Belgaum riots, anti-Muraji
[Guest]: Desai riots, basically, you know, I mean, they wanted to stop Muraji Desai and give
[Guest]: him a petition and Desai did not want to stop and he ran his vehicle over some ships and
[Guest]: etc.
[Guest]: So everybody went on rampage and then they arrested Thackeray and put him in prison and
[Guest]: he didn't like that experience of three months.
[Guest]: So he didn't want to go to jail, you know, I mean, so he preferred, you know, and he
[Guest]: supported and actually the opposition was very disappointed because at that point of
[Guest]: time, they had needed Thackeray's firepower.
[Guest]: They had needed his foot soldiers and then suddenly the foot soldiers were not available,
[Guest]: you know, I mean, and he had supported the Congress, but he had supported Indira Gandhi.
[Guest]: He also met Indira Gandhi during the emergency and Mrs. Gandhi also struck the Shiv Sena
[Guest]: off the banned parties list after meeting Bal Thackeray.
[Guest]: So there was a quid pro quo there.
[Guest]: But after she died, he did not feel obliged to support the Congress anymore.
[Guest]: So if you see there is a shift in his philosophy from region to religion from 1984 onwards
[Guest]: and from 1984 to about 1987, when there was a by-election in Vilepally in Mumbai, Dr.
[Guest]: Ramesh Prabhu was contesting that election.
[Guest]: He became a very sharp Hindutva wadi and his Hindutva was even too sharp for the BJP at
[Guest]: that point of time.
[Guest]: The BJP had just come out of this Janata Dal experiment, you know, I mean 1978 etc.
[Guest]: They had supported a Janata party candidate and Congress was contesting and Shiv Sena
[Guest]: was contesting and Bal Thackeray made these very, very incendiary speeches against Muslims
[Guest]: etc.
[Guest]: And he has the record of being the first Indian to be disenfranchised by the Election Commission
[Guest]: for basing his election campaign on religion rather than on secular issues.
[Guest]: But his campaign was in 1987, but it took 10 years for the decision to come.
[Guest]: So he was disenfranchised for six years and he couldn't vote until 2004.
[Guest]: And so was Mr. Ramesh Prabhu.
[Guest]: It destroyed Ramesh Prabhu's career, but it didn't make any difference to Bal Thackeray
[Guest]: because he was not contesting elections anyway.
[Guest]: And he continued with the same thing.
[Guest]: But you know what happened is after 87, after his sharp Hindutva focus, then Pramod Mahajan,
[Guest]: you know, I mean realized that, you know, they were also going, BJP was also shifting
[Guest]: towards a sharp Mandir focus etc.
[Guest]: And he said that we don't want our Hindutva votes to be divided.
[Guest]: They came together and it is in complete with Pramod Mahajan that Thackeray realized the
[Guest]: value of really seriously fighting the Assembly elections and coming to government.
[Guest]: So for the first time, usually he used to get only one MLA at a time in the Maharashtra
[Guest]: Assembly.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, in 1990 for the first time in alliance with the BJP, he got about 80
[Guest]: or 85 MLAs.
[Guest]: And then the next election, 95, he managed to get a government.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, we will talk about 1980s politics and the rise of the BJP and also the cooperative
[Amit Varma]: movement and the part that played in politics after the break.
[Amit Varma]: But before we go to the break, you know, you knew these people very well.
[Amit Varma]: For example, you knew Bal Thackeray very well.
[Amit Varma]: You interviewed him countless times.
[Amit Varma]: If I remember correctly, you broke the news to him that the Babri Masjid has broken and
[Unknown]: people are saying that Shiv Sinha has done it.
[Amit Varma]: So in your personal interactions with him, and I'm assuming after a while, like, was
[Amit Varma]: there some kind of friendship developing there?
[Amit Varma]: And did you find that in person he was reflective about what he was doing?
[Amit Varma]: Or was he always drunk on his Kool-Aid?
[Amit Varma]: Or was he always putting up a front for everybody, including you?
[Amit Varma]: Or was he reflective?
[Amit Varma]: Did he realize the mistakes he had made?
[Amit Varma]: Did he regret things he had done?
[Guest]: I used to have a love-hate relationship with him.
[Guest]: You know, I never agreed on certain issues.
[Guest]: But maybe, maybe there were some things that I agreed with him.
[Guest]: For example, when he said that, you know, I mean, do only criminals have human rights?
[Guest]: You know, I mean, and the victims don't have human rights.
[Guest]: Yes, I could not disagree with him over there.
[Guest]: But you know, and then once I challenged him, I said, how can you label all Muslims as anti-national?
[Guest]: And how can you label all Muslims as terrorists?
[Guest]: And there is an Abdul Hamid also, you know, I mean, the famous Abdul Hamid, you know,
[Guest]: who fought against Pakistan on the border.
[Guest]: He was killed and posthumously awarded the Paramvit Chakra, etc.
[Guest]: So he said, yes, I have to make a difference.
[Guest]: I have to make a difference between loyal Muslims and disloyal Muslims.
[Guest]: But if they want to stay in this country, and if they want to, you know, part of our
[Guest]: gross national product, you know, the gross domestic product, then they have to act like
[Guest]: Indians, which was also an acceptable thing.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, like, like, you can't have anybody living here in being a terrorist,
[Guest]: you know, I mean, you have to follow the laws, you have to follow the rules.
[Guest]: But I personally would not make a difference between the religions.
[Guest]: Tapri used to make a difference on that between the religions.
[Guest]: But this was before a lot of Saffron terrorism came to light, you know, I mean, so, so I
[Guest]: could not argue with him on that, you know, by the time the Saffron terrorism came to
[Guest]: light, he was a very sick man, he was always in hospital, you know, I mean, I never got
[Guest]: a chance to go and have those long conversations with him that I had had in the 80s and the
[Amit Varma]: 90s, etc.
[Amit Varma]: And was he someone who read books a lot?
[Amit Varma]: Or, you know, I mean, what was his intellectual engagement with the world per se?
[Amit Varma]: Did he read books?
[Amit Varma]: Were there thinkers he was influenced by?
[Guest]: You know, he had the advantage of having a lot of, like I said, the Maharashtrian intellectuals,
[Guest]: the early days, you know, like Dr. Ramesh Prabhu, he was a medical doctor, he was his
[Guest]: private physician, you know, he joined the Shiv Sena, the day Thackeray held that rally
[Guest]: in Shivaji Park, he signed up for the Shiv Sena.
[Guest]: And then he got noticed by Bal Thackeray and Thackeray called him home and he became Thackeray's
[Guest]: physician.
[Guest]: So they were lawyers, they were professors, they were doctors, they were engineers, all
[Guest]: these kind of people who joined and I'm sure they gave him inputs.
[Guest]: I'm sure they gave him inputs.
[Guest]: But like I said, he alienated all of these people.
[Guest]: And he decided to focus more on the lumpens, you know, he got a lot more out of the lumpens
[Guest]: and he got out of these intellectuals.
[Guest]: But I don't think he was very fond of reading.
[Guest]: I don't think he, you know, because he was never taken to quoting and things like that.
[Guest]: But then he would say Hitler was a nationalist.
[Guest]: I believe in Hitler.
[Guest]: He never read Hitler to know what Hitler had done.
[Guest]: And then when you challenged him and you said, do you know what he did to the Jews?
[Guest]: And he equated the Jews only with the Muslims, you know, and then when you told him that
[Guest]: the Jews at that point of time were all intellectuals, they were professors, they were doctors, you
[Guest]: know, I mean, they were philosophers, they were scientists, you know, he was a little
[Guest]: taken aback.
[Guest]: He said, really, they were not always like this.
[Guest]: I said, no, they had to become like this because of what happened during the Holocaust.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, they were not militant because, you know, Israel is now a very militant country,
[Guest]: you know, I mean, so and I told him that, you know, Israel has to be like that because
[Guest]: it is surrounded on all sides by Islamic nations, you know, I mean, so they have to do something
[Guest]: to keep their heads above water, you know, but they were not like that always.
[Guest]: And they were taken advantage of.
[Guest]: So he would be taken aback a little bit.
[Guest]: So I don't think he really actually bothered to read.
[Guest]: But there were people who were feeding him a lot of information, including from newspapers,
[Guest]: he would always have a lot of clippings marked in red and things like that with him.
[Amit Varma]: So he had a lot of inputs.
[Amit Varma]: And then attraction towards intellectuals like even Suresh Prabhu, who later on when
[Amit Varma]: he brought him into the party and, you know, insisted that he become a minister in the
[Unknown]: central government and so on.
[Amit Varma]: We'll take a quick commercial break and we'll continue this conversation.
[Unknown]: Hey, everybody, welcome to another great week on the IBM Podcast Network.
[Unknown]: If you're not following us on social media, please make sure you do.
[Unknown]: We're IBM Podcast on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram.
[Unknown]: Also want to remind you, please do fill out our listener survey.
[Unknown]: This is a really, really important thing for us right now.
[Unknown]: You can go to ibmpodcast.com slash survey.
[Unknown]: We ask you a few questions about who you are, what kind of podcast you like listening to,
[Unknown]: you know, what do you think of things going on so far?
[Unknown]: So please do fill that out.
[Unknown]: It would help us.
[Unknown]: Also would like to thank our sponsors on the network this week.
[Unknown]: We have Intel, Cambly and Storytel.
[Unknown]: This week on Cyrus Says, Cyrus is joined by writer Daksh Tyagi, Daksh talks about his
[Unknown]: debut book, A Nation of Idiots.
[Unknown]: He discusses what goes into writing satire, which is critical of the people and governments
[Unknown]: in power and what are the legal hassles in doing so.
[Unknown]: On the Filter Coffee podcast, Karthik is joined by brand builder and author Siddharth Banerjee
[Unknown]: and corporate mythologist and author Eka Chaturvedi Banerjee.
[Unknown]: Together, they talk about the art of hyper learning and discuss the journey on setting
[Unknown]: up 52 red pills.
[Unknown]: On Edges and Sledges, Varun Ashwin and DJ talk about India's T20 series win over the
[Unknown]: West Indies and the first ODI in Chennai.
[Unknown]: On The Habit Coach, Ashton talks about motivation, grit, self-discipline and about finding purpose
[Unknown]: in the everyday things that you do.
[Unknown]: On Tapri Tales, Madhuri narrates a story titled Reshma's Purse.
[Unknown]: Tune in to hear the backstories or the little things that reside inside a woman's purse.
[Unknown]: On Storytellers and Storytellers, Vineet is joined by actor Amol Parashar and content
[Unknown]: strategist at TVF, Akansh Skaur.
[Unknown]: They talk about the risks and rewards they encountered after quitting their traditional
[Unknown]: jobs for digital media entertainment.
[Unknown]: And with that, let's get you on with your show.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Sujata Anandan about Maharashtra politics.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, before the break, we've spoken a lot about the Shiv Sena and Sharad Pawar
[Amit Varma]: and we'll continue to do so as we go on through the 80s and 90s to the present time.
[Amit Varma]: But tell me also a little bit about how the Congress is evolving in this time and also
[Amit Varma]: about the very unusual role of cooperatives in Maharashtra politics.
[Guest]: See, I'll tell you, cooperatives are the backbone of the Congress and of Maharashtra politics,
[Guest]: which is why the Congress has lasted as long as it has done in Maharashtra.
[Guest]: It lost power in so many other states.
[Guest]: And even in 1978, when the Congress split, it did not quite go out of power.
[Guest]: And the two wings, you know, the Sharad Pawar Congress and the Vasanth Dada Patil Congress,
[Guest]: they continued because they were joined by the common interest of the cooperatives and
[Guest]: the cooperatives are very interestingly placed in the sense the farmers have to be members
[Guest]: of these cooperatives and they elect a chairperson.
[Guest]: And then the chairperson goes ahead to contest either the assembly election or the Lok Sabha
[Guest]: election.
[Guest]: So your local chairperson is either a member of parliament or a member of the legislative
[Guest]: assembly.
[Guest]: And for these sugar barons or cooperative barons, their politics is dependent upon their
[Guest]: business and their business is dependent upon politics.
[Guest]: And this sense was there only with Sharad Pawar, which is why in 1999, when he split
[Guest]: the Congress again, most of the sugar barons went to Sharad Pawar.
[Guest]: You know, the Apex Cooperative Bank, Ajit Pawar, his nephew, was the chairperson of
[Guest]: the Apex Cooperative Bank and all these sugar barons who were not necessarily Pawar supporters
[Guest]: and whom I wanted to support, Sonia Gandhi or the Congress, you know, they had their
[Guest]: loan spending with the Apex Cooperative Bank.
[Guest]: And then if they are not on the side of Sharad Pawar, you know, they don't get their loans
[Guest]: and that destroys their business and the business destroys their politics because if they don't
[Guest]: have a factory, they don't have voters at the assembly elections or parliamentary elections.
[Guest]: And it has really been their backbone.
[Guest]: And it also saves the farmers, you know, I mean, sugar is a very water intensive crop.
[Guest]: So sometimes that might cause problems during drought, etc.
[Guest]: Then these sugar barons set up, you know, dairying, you know, I mean, so a lot of dairies
[Guest]: have grown up in Maharashtra, so many names, you know, Varana and so many other things.
[Guest]: And so if you have a bad monsoon and you cannot grow crops, you cannot grow sugar cane, then
[Guest]: you depend upon dairy farming, you know, I mean, milk, you know, other things, cheese,
[Guest]: butter, all those things help the farmers.
[Guest]: So that is what the BJP had been trying to break in the past five years.
[Guest]: And I have a feeling that the, you know, the farmers problem in Maharashtra particularly
[Guest]: got compounded because of that, you know, because they would bring their crops or their
[Guest]: pulses or whatever they have to the Agriculture Produce Marketing Committee.
[Guest]: And, you know, the government would not give them the minimum retail price or whatever,
[Guest]: you know, I mean, they won't give them that.
[Guest]: And they would have to do distress sales, etc.
[Guest]: They would not even be able to recover.
[Guest]: And particularly with regard to tuvar dal, for example, you know, I mean, they would
[Guest]: pack this, you know, I mean, they harvest the tuvar dal sometime in March, April, and
[Guest]: they bring it to the APMC, you know, I mean, around that time.
[Guest]: And if you do not lift their pulses around that time, there are these sacks of pulses
[Guest]: sitting in the market yards.
[Guest]: And then there is a monsoon in June, and it rains and the sacks get soaked, you know,
[Guest]: I mean, and then they get mildew and things like that, and their entire crop is destroyed.
[Guest]: And this happened for three or four years, it has happened in Maharashtra, which is why
[Guest]: the problem that the Maharashtra farmers are facing has been much, much more than farmers
[Guest]: in other states.
[Guest]: And this was done deliberately to break the back of the NCP and the Congress, because
[Guest]: all these farmers voted for the NCP and the Congress.
[Guest]: And the ruling dispensation hoped that if the farmers suffer, then they would not vote
[Guest]: for the Congress and the NCP.
[Guest]: But like someone told me, that unfortunately, the BJP and the Shiv Sena do not understand
[Guest]: what a cooperative movement is.
[Guest]: They just, even a cooperative bank, they do not understand what a cooperative bank is
[Guest]: there for.
[Guest]: And cooperative bank is there for this only.
[Guest]: And the demonetization also broke their back, you know, because the farmers all have their
[Guest]: accounts only in cooperative banks.
[Guest]: And then you say that cooperative banks are not entitled to exchange the old notes.
[Guest]: They didn't have money.
[Guest]: And you brought the demonetization at the month of the Rabi season.
[Guest]: They were waiting to buy their seeds and fertilizers.
[Guest]: And you brought this in.
[Guest]: And one farmer told me that, man, I was not getting money out of farming.
[Guest]: So I shifted to trading.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, I bought seeds and fertilizers.
[Guest]: And I thought that this season I'm going to make a lot of money.
[Guest]: But now there's nobody coming and buying my seeds.
[Guest]: And you know, I mean, I've spent so much money and my seeds are sitting here, my fertilizer.
[Guest]: And what do I do?
[Guest]: So he started to give it to the farmers on credit.
[Guest]: He said, because at least if I gave it on credit, I can recover something.
[Guest]: Otherwise, it will go.
[Guest]: So that also broke their back.
[Guest]: In the context of Maharashtra particularly, I think the government had hoped that the
[Guest]: Congress and the NCP will lose their grip on the farmers by breaking their back.
[Guest]: But they do not understand.
[Guest]: When they set up a cooperative bank, they think it is about giving car loans and giving
[Guest]: housing loans.
[Guest]: They don't understand how the system works.
[Guest]: And they didn't understand the connection between farmers and agriculture and industry
[Guest]: and trade.
[Guest]: And they just didn't understand the connection that, you know, if the farmers do not have
[Guest]: a proper deal, if they are not producing proper crops, you know, I mean, that there is no
[Guest]: demand for tractors.
[Guest]: There is no demand for machinery.
[Guest]: There's no, you know, I mean, those kind of things.
[Guest]: They just didn't understand the connections.
[Guest]: As a result of which I have a feeling that the past dispensation has driven the rural
[Guest]: economy to the ground.
[Amit Varma]: I have multiple episodes on demonetization, which of course was massively disastrous for
[Amit Varma]: the entire economy regardless of timing.
[Amit Varma]: There was an interesting observation in your book also about cooperatives where you quote
[Amit Varma]: someone talking about how cooperatives were really only good for the rural elites.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, the way you describe the systems of how the cooperatives function, that the
[Amit Varma]: average farmer at the bottom of the food chain has no option but to go to a specific place
[Amit Varma]: and sell and buy at specific prices.
[Amit Varma]: And there are basically no functional markets for him.
[Amit Varma]: He's almost like a feudal.
[Guest]: Yes, it is feudalism.
[Guest]: It is feudalism.
[Guest]: Like I told you that, you know, I mean, their business dependent upon politics, politics
[Guest]: on their business.
[Guest]: But you know, at the bottom level, there is a zoning in Maharashtra.
[Guest]: You know, there are so many sugar cooperative factories and one factory is in one particular
[Guest]: zone, say the Satara zone or Sangli zone, or even Satara and Sangli may have two or
[Guest]: three zones.
[Guest]: So the farmers are within a radius of that zone and they have to necessarily take their
[Guest]: sugar cane to that factory.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, even if another factory is giving a better rate, they cannot take
[Guest]: their sugar cane to that factory.
[Guest]: And if they have not voted for that particular chairman or chairperson, they have not voted
[Guest]: for him and they have not elected him to office either the legislative assembly or parliament.
[Guest]: What happens is their sugar cane is not crushed in the sense of a cutting season is the harvesting
[Guest]: season is October to November.
[Guest]: If you go now, I mean, it is December now.
[Guest]: So if you go now into the rural areas, you'll see loads and loads of trucks and tractors
[Guest]: and bullock carts, you know, piled high with sugar cane, you know, heading towards these
[Guest]: factories.
[Guest]: Now the yield of the sugar cane, it has to be pressed within about 10 days of cutting.
[Guest]: It has to be crushed within 10 days of cutting.
[Guest]: Then it gives you a 90 to 95 percent yield.
[Guest]: And the longer you let it be, the juice yield will not be so much.
[Guest]: So if you crush it in April, it'll come down to 10 or 20 percent.
[Guest]: And the farmer gets paid according to the yield of his sugar cane.
[Guest]: So if you don't get, if you don't vote for the guy, this is how you get punished.
[Guest]: If someone suspects that you have not voted for him, he will not crush.
[Guest]: He will not say anything.
[Guest]: He will just not crush your sugar cane.
[Guest]: He'll say that, yeah, it is in the queue.
[Guest]: It's not yet come up for crushing.
[Guest]: By the time it comes up for crushing, he gets only a 10 to 20 percent yield on that.
[Guest]: He gets only that much money and everything is dependent upon that.
[Guest]: You know, only when he gets the money, he can buy for the seeds, you know, he can hire
[Guest]: labor, etc.
[Guest]: So it is really a very few.
[Amit Varma]: But so many poor farmers are trapped in this system.
[Amit Varma]: I would imagine that at some point there would be a movement among them and, you know, some
[Amit Varma]: political entrepreneur would take advantage of that.
[Guest]: You know, there was an attempt around the 90s to set up some private sugar factories.
[Guest]: But I don't think the private entrepreneurs took it very seriously because some of them
[Guest]: drove it to the ground.
[Guest]: You know, some of them had other reasons why they set up the factories.
[Guest]: And basically these kind of things continued.
[Guest]: And once upon a time, it was only Congress and NCP who was setting up the sugar factories.
[Guest]: Later on, even the BJP, even the Shiv Sena, they all started to set up, you know, because
[Guest]: they realized that, you know, I mean, this is how.
[Guest]: But you know, they had to be rural people when they were, you know, like Gopinath Munde,
[Guest]: the late Gopinath Munde, for example, you know, I mean, in 1994-95 when Sharad Pawar
[Guest]: was the chief minister, he was the opposition leader and we called him a fantastic opposition
[Guest]: leader because he was taking on Sharad Pawar, he was saying things, etc.
[Guest]: And Pawar is seen as a very strong chief minister.
[Guest]: But he could not answer any of Gopinath Munde's questions.
[Guest]: But you know, after Munde came into government, he went and set up his own sugar factories.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, he lost a lot of steam after that, you know, after that he could never
[Guest]: take up farmers issues, you know, I mean, so this is what happens in Maharashtra.
[Amit Varma]: It's very easy to be virtuous in opposition.
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, let's kind of get back to the 80s.
[Amit Varma]: And we are at a point where what has already happened by the late 70s and by the early
[Amit Varma]: 80s is the Shiv Sena's basically they've lost the Marathi middle class intellectual to Sharad
[Amit Varma]: Pawar's breakaway party.
[Amit Varma]: And they're basically a lumpen party.
[Amit Varma]: They're a force on the streets and not really a political force.
[Amit Varma]: And the Congress now wins an election and everyone's expecting that Vasantha Patil will
[Amit Varma]: be the chief minister.
[Amit Varma]: But instead, Indira Gandhi puts A. R. Anthony in that place.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit about that and the sentiments that that then evoked within the political
[Guest]: marketplace.
[Guest]: You know, Antony was good friends with Bal Thackeray.
[Guest]: And when he went and he requested Bal Thackeray in 1980, when they held the election because
[Guest]: Sharad Pawar was leading the Congress at that point of time and everybody expected the Congress
[Guest]: vote to split.
[Guest]: And of course, there was the Janta Party, Communist parties, all the ones who had been
[Guest]: part of the Janta Party formation in 77.
[Guest]: They were also in the fray.
[Guest]: But then Bal Thackeray decided at that point of time to support Indira Gandhi, which meant
[Guest]: that he did not contest the election.
[Guest]: He did not put any Shiv Sena's in the fray.
[Guest]: And people said that that helped the Congress to win the elections.
[Guest]: And Antony was a good friend of his.
[Guest]: Antony used to go up to Matushree and chat about Thackeray.
[Guest]: And if you have seen Mantralaya, the state headquarters, as soon as you enter, there
[Guest]: is a huge portrait of Shivaji.
[Guest]: And that is Antony's doing.
[Guest]: He said that he knew that there was this portrait of Shivaji and he searched the premises of
[Guest]: Mantralaya and then he found it in one room, you know, I mean, gathering dust, etc.
[Guest]: He had it dusted off and polished up and then he installed it over there.
[Guest]: And Thackeray quite appreciated that, you know, I mean that, okay, fine.
[Guest]: And Antony also insisted, Antony had hired a historian to write some 14 volumes on Chhatrapati
[Guest]: Shivaji and he said, I wanted it to be called only Shivaji the Great, like Akbar the Great
[Guest]: or Ashoka the Great, you know, or Alexander the Great, you know.
[Amit Varma]: So I wanted that.
[Amit Varma]: A branding exercise.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: So Thackeray appreciated that also.
[Guest]: And Antony wanted the sword of Bhavani to be returned by Queen Elizabeth, you know,
[Guest]: because the British had taken it over there and he made moves also to have that.
[Guest]: And all these were appreciated by Bal Thackeray.
[Guest]: So they were very great friends.
[Guest]: So until Antony was the Chief Minister, Thackeray was quite supportive of the Congress and until
[Guest]: Mrs. Gandhi was alive.
[Guest]: But in 1984, Mrs. Gandhi was assassinated.
[Guest]: But simultaneously in 1984 also, if you remember the Jammu Kashmir Liberation Front in the
[Guest]: UK, they kidnapped a diplomat called Ravindra Mhatre, you know, and Ravindra Mhatre was
[Guest]: Maharashtrian, you know, and Thackeray had this talent of marrying two sentiments together,
[Guest]: you know, like he married the Marathi sentiment and anti-left sentiment together to defeat
[Guest]: VK Krishnamenon in Bombay after Nehru's passing away when he got a ticket.
[Amit Varma]: 69 or something.
[Guest]: He did that.
[Guest]: So now, you know, Thackeray was, if nothing, he was at least a supporter of the Marathi
[Guest]: Manus.
[Guest]: So Ravindra Mhatre was a Marathi Manus.
[Guest]: But this is also when he, ahead of the BJP, he spotted this feeling growing in the Indians,
[Guest]: anti-Muslim appeasement feeling growing up amongst Indians.
[Guest]: And the Jammu Kashmir Liberation Front was responsible for his kidnapping and killing.
[Guest]: So he began to sharply, like I said, in 87, he came into a sharp focus that got him disenfranchised
[Guest]: also.
[Guest]: But he built up to this from 84.
[Guest]: Mrs. Gandhi was gone.
[Guest]: And he was now building it up.
[Guest]: At that point of time, even extreme Hindutva organizations like Patit, Pawan, Sange and
[Guest]: all, they did not pay any attention to Thackeray because they felt that he was too maverick.
[Guest]: He was saying all kinds of nonsense and everything.
[Guest]: But then Pramod Mahajan spotted what was happening and then he aligned with the BJP.
[Guest]: In 87, of course, Thackeray was too extreme Hindutva for even the BJP.
[Guest]: But by 1988-89, the BJP was clear that they were going to push for the Ram Temple in Ayodhya,
[Guest]: etc. and they wanted to consolidate their Hindutva vote and they came together.
[Guest]: So from 84 to about 89-90, Thackeray shifted focus to Hindutva.
[Guest]: He forgot the Marathi Manus.
[Guest]: But by that time, 75% of jobs, government jobs, etc. had gone to Maharashtrians.
[Guest]: Because even when Raj Thackeray in the 90s or in the 2000s, when he held an agitation
[Guest]: saying I want job for locals, they discovered 85% of the jobs are with locals, government
[Guest]: jobs, etc.
[Guest]: Because it was a conscious policy that was introduced by the Maharashtra government.
[Guest]: So Thackeray had nothing to do.
[Guest]: And he had become a paper tiger.
[Guest]: After having achieved his sub-nationalism, he was a paper tiger.
[Guest]: So then he shifted to Hindutva.
[Guest]: And then he joined up with the Shiv Sena.
[Guest]: And of course, in 1991, the demolition of the Babri Masjid, etc. that the Sena and the
[Guest]: BJP did together.
[Guest]: But I don't think the Shiv Sena demolished the Babri Masjid.
[Guest]: Not as much as they may claim that they demolished.
[Guest]: In fact, in my book, there is a whole chapter on that.
[Guest]: Because Thackeray never had the guts to do anything like that.
[Guest]: He would not be that extreme to bring down a mosque, etc.
[Guest]: Moreover, there were certain reasons.
[Guest]: There was no Shiv Sena leader present in Ayodhya.
[Guest]: They were sitting in Calcutta on the day the mosque was brought down.
[Guest]: But then the BJP leader said that the Shiv Sena has brought down the mosque.
[Guest]: So Thackeray was one of those people, he would always claim credit for anything if it gave
[Guest]: him any political mileage.
[Guest]: So at that point of time, he had said, in fact, he had told me, I had called him and
[Guest]: I had told him, and he had said that, you know, I mean, you call me back in 20 minutes,
[Guest]: because he was very taken aback that the Shiv Sena had brought down the mosque.
[Amit Varma]: You broke the news.
[Guest]: And I told him that there is a flash, you know, that has come.
[Guest]: And then he knew that his leaders were sitting in Calcutta.
[Guest]: It was the days before mobile phones.
[Guest]: So he could not really contact them like that.
[Guest]: And then when I called him back in 20 minutes, he said, if my Shiv Sena had brought down
[Guest]: the mosque, then I can be only proud of them.
[Guest]: I as a junior reporter did not recognize the if.
[Guest]: So even my story said that, you know, Thackeray is very proud of the Shiv Sena for bringing
[Guest]: down the mosque.
[Guest]: Then he began to get into trouble with the Liberians Commission, which probed the demolition
[Guest]: and with the Allahabad High Court.
[Guest]: So then he backtracked.
[Guest]: He said, my Shiv Sena did not bring down the mosque.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, the BJP did not have the guts to accept that they had done that.
[Guest]: And so I said that if my Shiv Sena had done it, then I can be only proud of them because
[Guest]: I'm not afraid of anybody.
[Guest]: But actually he was afraid of the court, you know, which is why he backtracked.
[Guest]: So from then, from the 80s, from 1984 to about 1991, 92, during the riots, etc., it was a
[Guest]: very sharp Hindutva focus.
[Guest]: Then, you know, the Muslims were also very disappointed with the Congress at that point
[Guest]: of time.
[Guest]: They said that for so many years we have supported them.
[Guest]: People have been saying Muslim appeasement, but where have we got anything from the Congress?
[Guest]: And then, you know, I mean, it is much better to make friends with the Shiv Sena and join
[Guest]: up with them.
[Guest]: I mean, at least let's make friends of an enemy, then we might be protected.
[Guest]: So Urdu papers at that point of time, you know, there was an election due in Maharashtra
[Guest]: in May that day.
[Guest]: Those days, the election used to happen in May.
[Guest]: So in May 1995, there was an election due.
[Guest]: And the Urdu papers were full of letters from Urdu readers and intellectuals and professors,
[Guest]: etc., saying that let's vote for the Shiv Sena this time.
[Guest]: When I broke the story, even Thackeray did not believe it.
[Guest]: He said some reporters are saying this because, you know, how is it possible that you have
[Guest]: gone against them during these riots, etc., and how is it possible that they will vote
[Guest]: for you?
[Guest]: But when the results came out, the Congress won only one seat in Mumbai, which is Colaba,
[Guest]: where there's a huge Parsi population.
[Guest]: So they probably voted for them in large numbers.
[Guest]: But even the Muslim majority areas like Umarkhadi, Paidoni, etc., Shiv Sena won it.
[Guest]: So then he realized that the Muslims had voted for him.
[Guest]: So after the demolition of the Babri Masjid in 1996 or 1997, he called for the setting
[Guest]: up of a school or a hospital for the poor in Ayodhya.
[Guest]: He shifted like that.
[Guest]: And then in 1999, he lost the elections again because by this time, the Muslims had kind
[Guest]: of gone back to the Congress and other parties.
[Guest]: And then he called for the disenfranchisement.
[Guest]: He said, you know, they should not be allowed to vote.
[Guest]: So he has always been shifting his stances depending upon how politically convenient
[Amit Varma]: it is for him.
[Amit Varma]: And it's also very interesting how, you know, unlike, of course, on the one hand, Shiv Sena
[Amit Varma]: is shifting from being anti-South Indian, as they were at one point in time, to then
[Amit Varma]: anti-Muslim, to then anti-North Indian migrants as they later became.
[Amit Varma]: So when they became North Indian migrants, he realized that the Maharashtrians don't
[Amit Varma]: actually want those jobs, which most of those North Indian migrants take.
[Amit Varma]: I was also sort of struck by, like one, of course, the Shiv Sena goes all out on Hindutva
[Amit Varma]: in the early 80s at a time where the BJP themselves, which had just formed, are experimenting with
[Amit Varma]: Gandhi and socialism and other soft things.
[Amit Varma]: And later, the BJP sort of comes around to Hindutva.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, people often lump the two together and say that, okay, both are parties which
[Amit Varma]: believe in Hindu nationalism.
[Amit Varma]: But as you've pointed out so well in your book, that there is a lot of difference between
[Amit Varma]: the sort of Hindu nationalisms that they believe in.
[Guest]: Can you elaborate on that a bit?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: You know, the BJP's philosophy is entirely, what do you say, RSS based.
[Guest]: You know, they believe in majoritarianism.
[Guest]: They believe that this is the land of the Hindus and everybody else is a second class
[Guest]: citizen.
[Guest]: So, the NRC and the citizenship amendment bill that they are bringing out, of course,
[Guest]: because of outrage, they have had to include other religions, but they have excluded Muslims.
[Guest]: Bal Thackeray's Hindutva was not really excluding Muslims.
[Guest]: I would say rather he was a bit like Shivaji in that sense, you know, I mean, although
[Guest]: Shivaji was not so sharply communal.
[Guest]: He was for self-rule, Hindu self-rule, but he had a lot of Muslim generals, etc.
[Guest]: Thackeray also tends to trust a lot of Muslims and particularly he makes a lot of, he used
[Guest]: to make a lot of difference between Maharashtrian Muslims, you know, the ones that have the
[Guest]: Konkan belt and Marathwada, etc.
[Guest]: You know, for him, the Marathi Manus was really important, whether the Marathi Manus was a
[Guest]: Dalit or whether he was a Muslim or whether he was a Hindu.
[Guest]: Whereas the BJP would, for BJP, it is only the Hindu and a certain kind of Hindu, because
[Guest]: I have a feeling the BJP also discriminates against the Dalits and certain lower caste
[Guest]: Hindus which will come up at a later date, you know, I mean, but they believe in majoritarianism.
[Guest]: They believe in either throwing these people out or rendering them second-class citizens.
[Guest]: Thackeray was not doing that.
[Guest]: Thackeray said that if they want to live in this country, you know, I mean, they have
[Guest]: to be loyal to this country.
[Guest]: They have to be true to this country, which is, which even I would say as somebody who
[Guest]: is a liberal and who believes in secularism, I would also say the same thing.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, BJP's Hindutva is not like that.
[Guest]: You know, a Muslim is a Muslim and a Muslim is a traitor.
[Guest]: He is a terrorist and he has no business to be there.
[Guest]: That is the difference between Thackeray's and BJP's Hindutva.
[Amit Varma]: Another interesting difference which you point out and another sort of interesting dramatic
[Amit Varma]: strain that's happening in this time is the Brahmin versus Maratha thing comes up here
[Amit Varma]: again.
[Amit Varma]: Obviously, the RSS is all Nagpur based Brahmins and they are also Maharashtrian and they begin
[Amit Varma]: to feel a little resentful of, you know, a lot of the so-called Maratha dominance of
[Amit Varma]: this movement to the point that you talk about how at one point, you know, Mahajan of course
[Amit Varma]: is a Brahmin, but his aide Gopinath Munde is an OBC and as a counter to counteract those
[Amit Varma]: guys they start promoting Nitin Gadkari.
[Guest]: No, no.
[Amit Varma]: They started promoting Devendra Fadnavis.
[Amit Varma]: Devendra Fadnavis I thought was promoted by Mahajan and Munde.
[Guest]: The RSS started promoting Gadkari and as a counter to that these guys start promoting
[Guest]: Devendra Fadnavis.
[Guest]: Because you know, see Gadkari was already part of the RSS at that time.
[Guest]: He became the president of the Maharashtra unit of the BJP and he and Mahajan and Munde
[Guest]: never really got along.
[Guest]: And I think I mentioned in my book Maharashtra Maximus that at one point of time Munde and
[Guest]: Gadkari had come to blows literally, you know, I mean, they were ruling on the floor etc.
[Guest]: You didn't mention ruling on the floor.
[Guest]: And then Mahajan set about looking for somebody to counter Gadkari and then he managed to
[Guest]: get this person who in every which way was like Gadkari, you know, he was from Nagpur,
[Guest]: he was also a lawyer, he was also a law student, his parents were also part of the RSS, you
[Guest]: know, I mean, there was nothing to and both were the Shastra Brahmins, you know, there
[Guest]: was really nothing to distinguish between them, except that Munde and Mahajan might
[Guest]: never have thought that one day they will not be around in this world.
[Guest]: And you know, I mean, this man would kind of overcome everything and he would become
[Guest]: the Chief Minister of Maharashtra.
[Guest]: Even Gadkari would not have thought that.
[Guest]: But they deliberately promoted Devendra Fadnavis.
[Amit Varma]: And it's also very interesting like how you point out that how Mahajan and Munde to counteract
[Amit Varma]: the RSS support of Gadkari promoted Fadnavis and a couple of decades later, Modi does the
[Guest]: same thing by making Fadnavis Chief Minister of Maharashtra.
[Guest]: Yes, yes, because Gadkari is really very close to the RSS.
[Guest]: He virtually grew up in the RSS headquarters in Nagpur, which is not the thing with Devendra
[Guest]: Fadnavis.
[Guest]: His father believed in the philosophy, his aunt was also a minister in the Maharashtra
[Guest]: government.
[Guest]: So they are ideologues, they are RSS ideologues and maybe they have attended a shakha or two.
[Guest]: But you know, it is not like Gadkari is a child of the RSS.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, he was literally brought up over there.
[Guest]: So between Fadnavis and you know, that is what it is.
[Guest]: Mahajan's spotting was very good.
[Guest]: So he picked Devendra Fadnavis.
[Guest]: So when it came to a choice between Gadkari and Fadnavis, there is no way any of the RSS
[Guest]: leaders could argue that Gadkari is better than Fadnavis or why Fadnavis is not as good
[Amit Varma]: as Gadkari.
[Guest]: Fadnavis is also smoother and less crude in the way he sort of addresses matters.
[Guest]: Yes, yes.
[Guest]: He is very clever also, slightly Machiavellian also.
[Guest]: And Nitin Gadkari is more like, you know, I mean, open about those kind of things, you
[Guest]: know, aa, mai tujhe dikhata hu kind of persons, you know.
[Amit Varma]: And another interesting fault line, which again re-emerges in our narrative here is
[Amit Varma]: a Maharashtrian versus Gujarati narrative.
[Amit Varma]: Because at this point, the BJP has Modi and Amit Shah, who are kind of running the show
[Amit Varma]: and the Shiv Sena doesn't really like that because there is still that, you know, simmering
[Amit Varma]: resentment right from the times of Murariji Desai.
[Guest]: Yes, from the times of Murariji Desai and it has resurfaced itself.
[Guest]: Now I have to tell you that my friend's father-in-law, he was a very hardcore BJP voter.
[Guest]: And what he told me after this imbroglio last month, he said that, you know, had Nitin Gadkari
[Guest]: been in the negotiations with Uddhav Thackeray and had he said that we never promised the
[Guest]: Shiv Sena chief ministership for two and a half years, I would have believed Nitin Gadkari.
[Guest]: But now I believe Uddhav Thackeray because the Gujarati duo cannot be trusted, he said,
[Guest]: you know, I mean, you know, because, because they will promise anything.
[Guest]: They will promise the moon to anybody.
[Guest]: And, you know, I mean, when it is advantageous to them, aur jab unka kaam ho jata hai, then
[Guest]: they will kind of withdraw and they will go back on their promise.
[Guest]: So now I tend to believe Uddhav Thackeray.
[Guest]: And he said, I don't want achche din.
[Guest]: I want sachche din, he said.
[Guest]: So I'm now supporting Uddhav and I'll be voting for the Shiv Sena in the next election.
[Guest]: You know, so this has been a turnaround by a Maharashtrian hardcore BJP voter because
[Guest]: of this distrust of the Gujaratis.
[Guest]: And you know, the thing is the government, the Shiv Sena government has also come because
[Guest]: even Modi and Shah got a little worried because the Shiv Sena were on the point of descending
[Guest]: on the streets a couple of days before Uddhav got sworn in.
[Guest]: And they were all preparing to target the Gujaratis in Bombay.
[Guest]: And if that had happened, you know, it would have completely gone against Modi and Shah
[Guest]: because two Gujaratis sitting in the central government, strong, powerful men, and you
[Guest]: are not able to protect your own in Maharashtra.
[Guest]: And you know, the Gujaratis know about that resentment.
[Guest]: And for a long time, they had put their head under the radar.
[Guest]: You know, they keep their head down and they continue to work and they make some compromises
[Guest]: with the Shiv Sena if needed.
[Guest]: You do your dhandho and let the boys do whatever on the streets.
[Guest]: Yes, that is what they do.
[Guest]: But you know, it manifests itself in so many ways.
[Guest]: You know, I think in my book, I mentioned about, you know, food habits, for example,
[Guest]: this beef ban and you know, imposition of vegetarianism.
[Amit Varma]: Another difference, that's another difference between the BJP's Hindutva and Shiv Sena's
[Amit Varma]: Hindutva.
[Guest]: The BJP's Hindutva is a vegetarian Hindutva, but Shiv Sena, it's everything.
[Guest]: Yes, yes, yes, everything.
[Guest]: And there was a fight also because they are building society somewhere in the suburbs,
[Guest]: where, you know, a Maharashtrian family that day was, I think, on a Sunday was cooking
[Guest]: fish or something.
[Guest]: And the Gujaratis had a Brahma Puja or something like that.
[Guest]: And then they objected to that and they almost came to blows and the police had to be called
[Guest]: in etc.
[Guest]: And Shiv Sena's and MNS workers all kind of descended and said, we are not going to allow
[Guest]: you to impose your vegetarianism on us.
[Guest]: We have a right to eat whatever we want in our house.
[Guest]: We are not imposing it on you.
[Guest]: So these fault lines keep opening up between the two communities.
[Amit Varma]: And another interesting fault line that, you know, emerges later in the narrative is again
[Amit Varma]: of caste, but the Dalit system, like you pointed out about how one very key moment in Maharashtra
[Amit Varma]: politics was a renaming of Marathwada University to, you know, after Dr. Ambedkar.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit about that and how that affected the Shiv Sena's fortune.
[Guest]: You know, that move was started by Sharad Pawar during his first term in 1978 as Chief
[Guest]: Minister.
[Guest]: You know, he loves to think of himself as a social engineer and he has done a lot of
[Guest]: social engineering, in fact.
[Guest]: But he failed to realize this Maratha Resentment for Dalits, even during his second or third
[Guest]: term as Chief Minister, when he had tried to mix up the populations after the Lathur
[Guest]: earthquake, he had faced that problem.
[Guest]: But during this time, during the renaming in 1978, he just decided, you know, I mean,
[Guest]: that he would name that it was just known as Marathwada University.
[Guest]: And he said there is already a Shivaji University in Kuala Lumpur and other intellectuals had
[Guest]: been given, you know, other universities named after them.
[Guest]: So he said, we will name this after Babasaheb Ambedkar, because this was also the Karmabhumi
[Guest]: of Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar.
[Guest]: He did not realize the extent of Maratha Resentment.
[Guest]: It was real violence, the kind of violence that Mumbai had seen in 1969 during, you know,
[Guest]: the Bilgaum stir.
[Guest]: And later in 1991-92, that kind of violence happened in about 79-80.
[Guest]: And Shraddha Pawar was really very taken aback, you know, because he was a Maratha, he belonged
[Guest]: to the Maratha, he was slightly liberal, etc.
[Guest]: He thought that all Marathas might be like that.
[Guest]: And when the violence really went out of hand, he had to drop the idea of renaming the Marathwada
[Guest]: University.
[Guest]: And everybody then pushed it on the back burner.
[Guest]: Nobody dared, no chief minister who came after that dared to rename that university.
[Guest]: Then he went to the center, but then he came back again in 1993, I think he came back after
[Guest]: the riots, 1991-92.
[Guest]: He came back after that time and in 93, he decided to rename the Marathwada University.
[Guest]: And by this time, he had learned his lesson a little bit.
[Guest]: So he decided that instead of just calling the Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar University, I will
[Guest]: call it the Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Marathwada University.
[Guest]: So it is now known as BAMU, Babasaheb Ambedkar Marathwada University.
[Guest]: But even so, the Marathas did not like it.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, because there is really a sharp focus and sharp divide.
[Guest]: The Marathas consider themselves upper caste.
[Guest]: They don't want to study in a university which is named after a Dalit leader, even if he
[Guest]: is such a big icon as the father of the Indian constitution, they didn't like it.
[Guest]: And at that point of time, Thakre again spotted his chance.
[Guest]: He said that I will not allow and Thakre never liked the Buddhist Dalits.
[Guest]: You know, he preferred the Hindu Dalits to the Buddhist Dalits and he didn't like Ambedkar
[Guest]: very much in that sense.
[Guest]: So he decided to oppose the whole thing.
[Guest]: And that is where a real shift took place because he decided to go to Aurangabad and
[Guest]: he decided to hold a rally, etc.
[Guest]: Now once again, the government, you know, again, it was a Congress government in place.
[Guest]: They again use the trick, you know, sending the police to him and saying that you either
[Guest]: go in, you make your speech and come to jail or else you turn around and go back to Mumbai,
[Guest]: you know, I mean, otherwise you'll be sitting in jail.
[Guest]: And then he just turned around and went and he left the people sitting in the ground.
[Guest]: He did not address them.
[Guest]: But then the upper caste Marathas shifted focus to the Shiv Sena instead of voting for
[Guest]: the Congress.
[Guest]: They were Congress voters and Pawar was so confident that because he was a Maratha and
[Guest]: because he was making the move, the Marathas will understand what he was doing.
[Guest]: But they really didn't understand.
[Guest]: So that led to a, what do you say, voter change in Marathwada.
[Guest]: You know, instead of the Congress used to win elections, Congress NCP used to win elections
[Guest]: there.
[Guest]: And every time Congress used to win, they shifted focus to Shiv Sena because BJP was
[Guest]: in alliance of the Shiv Sena and the BJP managed to get and get a leg into that area.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a very interesting insight about how crucial that vote can be.
[Amit Varma]: And you've also pointed out in your book quite correctly and quite naturally, it's what one
[Amit Varma]: would expect that the leaders of the Dalit movements, the various Dalit leaders who have
[Amit Varma]: come up like Athavale and so on, basically acting purely out of self-interest on getting
[Amit Varma]: the best deal they could for themselves and not necessarily for the upliftment of the
[Amit Varma]: people that they were representing.
[Amit Varma]: So how has sort of the Dalit vote moved over the last 20-30 years after this?
[Amit Varma]: Like what has happened nationally, of course, is that all said and done, the Dalits have
[Amit Varma]: voted more for the BJP than any other party.
[Amit Varma]: So in certain ways, the BJP has sort of succeeded for the moment, at least in wooing that section
[Amit Varma]: of the World Bank.
[Guest]: How has it been in Maharashtra?
[Guest]: No, in Maharashtra, it has been largely Dalits always go with the strongest party or the
[Guest]: ruling dispensation.
[Guest]: And they are always looking, the leaders as well as the community is always looking for
[Guest]: largest from the party in power.
[Guest]: So that is what is happening.
[Guest]: Athavale is the biggest example of that.
[Guest]: He was first supporting the Congress and then when Sharad Pawar formed the NCP, he went
[Guest]: to the NCP and then he went to the Shiv Sena and then he went to the BJP.
[Guest]: And every time he got something from these parties and you leave your voters with practically
[Guest]: nothing.
[Guest]: But, you know, I mean, if you also try to and the same thing is happening with Prakash
[Guest]: Ambedkar, although he carries the name of his grandfather, Babasaheb Ambedkar, he's
[Guest]: not able to strike out on his own.
[Guest]: He's not able to become an alternative to the Dalit community.
[Guest]: They vote in certain proportion for him, but essentially he's denting the Congress vote
[Guest]: because if they didn't vote for him or if his candidate was not standing in the fray,
[Guest]: then they would all be voting for the Congress or they would be voting for the BJP.
[Guest]: And this time everybody says that, you know, I mean, the BJP set up certain political parties
[Guest]: to dent the Congress vote, you know, the Dalit vote, the Muslim vote, etc.
[Guest]: And the Dalits have always been dependent upon the bigger parties and they cannot, they
[Guest]: do not seem to be able to survive, although they have doctors, they have engineers, they
[Guest]: have pilots, etc.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, they're all educated people, but they somehow don't seem to be able to
[Guest]: form a political group which will challenge parties like the BJP and the Congress and
[Amit Varma]: come up on their own.
[Amit Varma]: Because politicians everywhere of whatever caste look after their self-interest first.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, with that sort of cynicism, it's kind of hard to get ahead.
[Amit Varma]: Another aspect I wanted to explore was the role of women in politics.
[Amit Varma]: Now Indian politics, like Indian society, is very sexist and misogynist.
[Amit Varma]: But there's one very interesting stand in your narrative of the Shiv Sena that you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: about the role that women played in the Shiv Sena and you mentioned like three particular
[Amit Varma]: kinds of roles, which I found very fascinating.
[Guest]: Can you elaborate on that?
[Guest]: You know, see, Thakre did not know what to do with women.
[Amit Varma]: And like all Indian men.
[Guest]: No, you know, this reservation for women came round about 1989 because Rajiv Gandhi, who
[Guest]: was the Prime Minister at that point of time, you know, he wanted to change the Panchayati
[Guest]: laws and everything and then they reserved some 30%, 33% seats for women.
[Guest]: At that point of time, frankly speaking, even the Congress, even the BJP, nobody knew what
[Guest]: to do with that, you know, I mean, because although the Congress and the BJP had their
[Guest]: mahila wings, you know, I mean, women's wings and all that, but they were not really very
[Guest]: active politicians.
[Guest]: But the Shiv Sena was entirely a male oriented party and the Sena leaders also, when I asked
[Guest]: one of them, they said, Nangchi party purushi party aahe, you know, I mean, you know, that
[Guest]: it is very, it is only men in the party.
[Guest]: And then he needed to give the seats, 30% seats have been reserved in the municipal
[Guest]: corporation.
[Guest]: You need to give women those seats.
[Guest]: So, you know, he fished out all these people who were either the wives or the daughters
[Guest]: or sisters in laws or mothers of many of these Shiv Sena shakha pramukhs and all those kind
[Guest]: of things.
[Guest]: And he gave them tickets and many of them won the election.
[Guest]: But you know, I mean, it basically began, it basically began there at the lower levels,
[Guest]: you know, shakha's and slums, etc.
[Guest]: But then the women defined a role for themselves.
[Guest]: You know, they used to come out in the sense, women used to, domestic servants used to be
[Guest]: exploited for example, you know, I mean, maybe by their male employers, they used to be exploited.
[Guest]: So they came out with this name and shame kind of a policy.
[Guest]: They would go outside the houses of these men who were mistreating the women, not just
[Guest]: in homes, but also in factories, for example, you know, sweatshops, etc., where the women
[Guest]: were employed and you know, they were being treated badly.
[Guest]: So they would go, they would name and shame and the men would get very scared.
[Guest]: So they formed their own, what do you say, militant wing.
[Amit Varma]: So in a sense, it was like a sort of Me Too empowered by the Shiv Sena.
[Guest]: Yes, yes.
[Guest]: And Tagore used to call them Rand Ragini's, you know, the beauties of the field, you know,
[Guest]: I mean, Rand Ragini's.
[Guest]: But you know, he really did not know what to do with them.
[Guest]: And he thought that they should be supportive of their husbands, etc.
[Guest]: But you know, interestingly, during the riots, I've said that in my book, Pramod Nawalkar,
[Guest]: who was this senior leader, his wife one day came to him with some bangles and said, wear
[Guest]: these bangles, you know, because you are capable of nothing else.
[Guest]: So he said, what do you mean?
[Guest]: You know, he had been going out in the streets and trying to broker peace between the, you
[Guest]: know, warring communities.
[Guest]: And she said, you should be actually going out there and destroying those people.
[Guest]: But you're brokering peace.
[Guest]: And this was happening.
[Guest]: And Nawalkar, of course, his family was educated, etc.
[Guest]: But then, you know, later on, Nawalkar realized that this is happening in many Shiv Sena.
[Guest]: You know, these women, when their husbands were, you know, the husbands were reluctant
[Guest]: to go out and riot in the streets, because they knew what the consequences would be and
[Guest]: everything.
[Guest]: So when the husbands were sleeping, they would hide their trousers and pajamas.
[Guest]: And give them petticoats.
[Guest]: Put bindis on them and bangles, etc.
[Guest]: And when the men woke up, you know, they don't have clothes to go out, you know.
[Guest]: So they said that, you know, I mean, you go out now, you know, I mean, this is all that
[Guest]: you're capable of.
[Guest]: Reluctantly, the men agreed to kind of, you know, go and riot.
[Guest]: And then these women would throw a protective cordon around them.
[Guest]: When the police came that time, the Mumbai police did not have so many women in the police
[Guest]: force.
[Guest]: So they were very afraid of manhandling the women, you know, I mean, any charges could
[Guest]: be lobbed against them.
[Guest]: So they would throw a cordon.
[Guest]: And by that time, those men would disappear into the woodworks.
[Guest]: They would never be able to catch them.
[Guest]: This is a role the women defined for themselves, a real militant role.
[Guest]: And then after the riots were over, they were doing these things, going to offices, seeing
[Guest]: which woman is being exploited, you know, I mean, somebody would come to them with a
[Guest]: complaint and officer would be treating somebody badly.
[Guest]: A woman would lodge a molestation complaint or rape complaint.
[Guest]: So they were all there for that kind of a thing.
[Guest]: And at that point, before the riots, they used to make a distinction between themselves
[Guest]: and what they used to call the air conditioned women.
[Guest]: That is the women who live in high rises, who wear paitani sarees, you know, who wander
[Guest]: around in cars.
[Guest]: But the riots brought these both sections together.
[Guest]: This woman, Shiv Senik, who used to work in this air conditioned house, you know, and
[Guest]: their common enemy was the Muslim man on the streets, you know, so that kind of brought
[Guest]: them together.
[Guest]: And it kind of changed the fundamental face of the mahila gadi, you know, from being just
[Guest]: what you say, women lumpens, from just being women lumpens, it kind of shifted to more,
[Guest]: what do you say, sophisticated women who are bound by the common, what do you say, aim
[Guest]: of protecting themselves from the other.
[Amit Varma]: I found this a very fascinating chapter because on the one hand, the role they play is very
[Amit Varma]: salutary that they call out the oppression of themselves and other women, because they
[Amit Varma]: now have the Shiv Sena tag behind them and they can say whatever and everyone's scared
[Amit Varma]: of them.
[Amit Varma]: And on the other hand, it's also scary.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, giving your husband bangles or a petticoat is in itself a slightly patriarchal thing,
[Amit Varma]: because why should somebody wearing bangles or a petticoat be any less brave than somebody
[Guest]: in trousers.
[Amit Varma]: So that's sort of reinforcing those notions.
[Amit Varma]: And this is obviously not salutary because they're exhorting their husbands to basically
[Guest]: go out and kill.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: And you know, the Shiv Sena women were more vicious and righteous than the men.
[Guest]: Why do you think that is?
[Guest]: You know, they came from a certain strata where they had always faced this problem with
[Guest]: the other, maybe not just the Muslim men, but they always faced the other in the sense
[Guest]: that employer, you know, I mean, who exploited them or a government officer, you know, I
[Guest]: mean, who again, you know, in various ways exploited them when they went there for a
[Guest]: ration card or when they went there for something.
[Guest]: There was this kind of a feeling in them and they were not really hothouse flowers.
[Guest]: They could have come, you know, in fact, I don't know whether it has been reported too
[Guest]: much, but around that time I was reporting on the riots, they had actually pulled a Muslim
[Guest]: man out of a bus and got together and beaten him up and left him on the road and he had
[Guest]: died, etc.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, so they were capable of that kind of a thing.
[Guest]: And the men were not like Pramod Namalkar wanting to go and broker peace between the
[Guest]: two communities and the wife saying you wear bangles, you're not capable of anything else,
[Guest]: you know, I mean, men were like that, the riots might not have been so vicious had the
[Amit Varma]: women not been egging them on.
[Amit Varma]: I'm just thinking aloud, is it possible that women the way they are in Indian society,
[Amit Varma]: much, you know, oppressed and, you know, have to face much more hardship than men, that
[Amit Varma]: they therefore have also have much more pent up anger.
[Guest]: Yeah, at a time like this, this is one way it can come out.
[Guest]: Yes, that is, you know, that is true.
[Guest]: And I call them the right wing feminists.
[Guest]: Generally we associate feminism with the left wing, you know, left intellectuals, etc.
[Guest]: These were absolutely bottom level right wing feminists.
[Guest]: And you know, after the riots, they took to, you know, protecting themselves in the sense,
[Guest]: you know, if a woman came and complained that my husband is treating me badly, my mother
[Guest]: in law is treating me badly, my father in law, you know, these people would be there
[Guest]: in the home, they would be beating up that man and things like that.
[Guest]: And those men went and complained to Bal Thackeray that this is what is happening, you know,
[Guest]: and you have to do something about it.
[Guest]: And even Bal Thackeray did not know what to do about it, because the women had completely
[Guest]: gone out of hand.
[Guest]: He did not, then he tried to tell them that you have to support your husbands, you know,
[Guest]: I mean, you have to help them in there.
[Guest]: But they were not listening.
[Guest]: And many of these women did not like the compromises that he later made, you know, I mean, with
[Guest]: the Muslims and things like that.
[Guest]: They did not like that.
[Guest]: They said, we are not going to support it, etc.
[Guest]: You know, so it is a, it is a wing which could have turned into Frankenstein's monster.
[Guest]: But because the women were probably had other preoccupations, like bringing up their children,
[Guest]: you know, I mean, making sure that their families are fed, and, you know, comfortable and all
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: They did not have so much time to go out and become monsters.
[Guest]: But they were capable of being that.
[Amit Varma]: This is so fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, so many novels and graphic novels and web series can be made out of this.
[Amit Varma]: I've taken a lot of your time, so let's skip to the present.
[Amit Varma]: And let's talk about what happened this month.
[Amit Varma]: And you've obviously been writing a lot about the sort of how the Sena and the BJP can't
[Amit Varma]: get along and it is not possible that they will ever really be together for a long time.
[Amit Varma]: So in a sense, you saw that part of it coming.
[Amit Varma]: Can you sort of and we all know what is Sharad Pawar's opportunism and how you know, no one's
[Unknown]: an enemy forever, no one's a friend forever.
[Amit Varma]: Obviously, you have written a lot about Ajit Pawar's resentments over the years and how
[Amit Varma]: they have been playing out.
[Amit Varma]: So reading your books, and I read your two books recently after these events happened,
[Amit Varma]: and I was like that, you know, you practically saw it all coming.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about how Maharashtra politics has been for the last seven, eight
[Amit Varma]: years.
[Guest]: You know, after Balasaheb Thackeray, Uddhav was slightly directionless.
[Guest]: He did not know which way to swing.
[Guest]: Though he has defied all predictions of the critics that the Shiv Sena will collapse after
[Guest]: Bal Thackeray.
[Guest]: And actually that is what the BJP intended.
[Guest]: Right from the time even when Balasaheb was around, the younger lot of BJP leadership
[Guest]: wanted to break the alliance because they thought this alliance was curtailing them
[Guest]: a little bit.
[Guest]: They could not put down roots in the villages, in the talukas, in the block levels, etc.
[Guest]: And you know, people like Nitin Gadkari and Gopinath Munde, who did not get along with
[Guest]: each other, they agreed that we have to break ties with the Shiv Sena.
[Guest]: But at that point of time, Advani was in the leadership position in the BJP and he was
[Guest]: always ambitious.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, he wanted to become the prime minister, etc.
[Guest]: And he knew that he needed the Shiv Sena.
[Guest]: And if you break ties with the Shiv Sena, you are likely to lose a lot of seats.
[Guest]: Maharashtra in terms of Lok Sabha seats is the second largest state after Uttar Pradesh.
[Guest]: Uttar Pradesh sends about 80 and Maharashtra sends about 48.
[Guest]: Next is Bihar.
[Guest]: After Bihar broke up into Bihar and Jharkhand.
[Guest]: So he did not allow these younger leaders to break ties with Bal Thackeray.
[Guest]: And you know, they waited patiently for Bal Thackeray to pass away.
[Guest]: And they thought that after Thackeray dies, the Shiv Sena will collapse.
[Guest]: Which is why in 2014, when Modi realized that he had stormed through the nation and he had
[Guest]: got such a majority, and he said, and the BJP leader said, this is the time to break
[Guest]: ties with the Shiv Sena and they'll be completely finished.
[Guest]: And just 15 days before the elections, they broke ties.
[Guest]: They broke the alliance and they thought gone because Uddhav had 12 stents in his heart.
[Guest]: He had just come through this heart operation and they were sure he will not be able to
[Guest]: campaign.
[Guest]: They were sure he won't be able to do anything.
[Guest]: And he comes up with 63 seats in the assembly and the BJP gets only 122, which is of course
[Guest]: double the Shiv Sena.
[Guest]: But it is far below the mark and it is far less than expected considering how Modi was
[Guest]: blazing through India at that point of time.
[Guest]: So now they are in a position where they have to ally with the Shiv Sena.
[Guest]: Of course, the NCP helped it to win the vote, but they have to ally with the Shiv Sena.
[Guest]: And for five years, Uddhav Thackeray played the role of an opposition leader.
[Guest]: He never allowed the BJP to rest in peace.
[Guest]: He even targeted Modi.
[Guest]: He targeted Shah.
[Guest]: He targeted the government, both in the centre and this one.
[Guest]: And the Congress and NCP were doing nothing at that point of time and he occupied the
[Guest]: role of the opposition, which was appreciated a lot by the people, including his voters.
[Guest]: It was appreciated a lot by the people.
[Guest]: But by the time 2019 came around, the BJP was now no longer sure, anti-incumbency kicking
[Guest]: in.
[Guest]: They were no longer sure whether they would be able to win an election on their own.
[Guest]: So Amit Shah kind of, you know, I mean, Kejrol, Persuade, Threaten and somehow brought Uddhav
[Guest]: on board.
[Guest]: But one strategic mistake that Uddhav made was to lose sight of the Marathi Manus.
[Guest]: You know, he started a Me Mumbiker policy once upon a time.
[Guest]: Raj Thackeray sabotaged it.
[Guest]: But then Raj Thackeray found his MNS and went.
[Guest]: And then, you know, Uddhav was going on, I want the Ram temple.
[Guest]: I want the Ram temple.
[Guest]: Now if you want to vote for the Ram temple, why do you want to vote for the duplicate
[Guest]: when you have the original?
[Guest]: You know, the BJP practices Hindutva much better than the Shiv Sena can.
[Guest]: Shiv Sena can at the most sit back and say, I want the Ram temple, but you can't do anything
[Guest]: about the Ram temple.
[Guest]: So there is a vote in Maharashtra.
[Guest]: You know, there is a real regional Marathi ethos vote.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, they would vote only for the Shiv Sena.
[Guest]: They would not vote for the BJP.
[Guest]: But amongst the Marathi Manus, there is also a Hindutva vote.
[Guest]: Now the BJP wants to capture that Hindutva vote.
[Guest]: You know, so Uddhav recognized in time what was happening.
[Guest]: He realized that they were not able to finish me from outside.
[Guest]: But if I now become part of their government and I become, play second fiddle to them,
[Guest]: they'll finish me from inside.
[Guest]: And in this arrangement, his young son, inexperienced, raw son would have been made the deputy chief
[Guest]: minister.
[Guest]: BJP would have expected him to keep quiet.
[Guest]: You know, we gave you a deputy chief minister, but Aditya would not understand, you know,
[Guest]: I mean, how they were destroying the party, etc.
[Guest]: So Uddhav recognized that on time and then he pushed.
[Guest]: Now if the BJP would have agreed for a two and a half year chief ministership, he would
[Guest]: have taken that.
[Guest]: He would not have broken ties with that, but he would have used the two and a half years
[Guest]: in government to shore up his voter base, Marathi Manus, you know.
[Guest]: But that did not happen.
[Guest]: And then, of course, in the beginning, Sharad Pawar kept saying that we have been given
[Guest]: the mandate to sit in the opposition, we'll be sitting in the opposition, etc.
[Guest]: But then there was a push from the Shiv Sena.
[Guest]: Sanjay Rao going again and again and meeting Sharad Pawar in this one.
[Guest]: And Pawar, well, he's, you know, I mean, Chanakya and Machiavelli rolled into one.
[Guest]: So he realized the opportunity.
[Guest]: And the Congress was a little wary of this.
[Guest]: But this time the Congress was completely dependent upon Pawar, even for the election.
[Guest]: And you know, the kind of result that they got, what the NCP got, what the Congress got,
[Guest]: and what the BJP did not get.
[Guest]: Because considering the kind of role that the BJP was on, instead of 105, they should
[Guest]: have got at least about 150, 160 seats on their own.
[Guest]: They were talking about 220, though so be spared.
[Guest]: But I thought they may get 180 because the Congress's best position at the height of
[Guest]: its power was 180.
[Guest]: I thought they would get 180.
[Guest]: I also never expected that they would stop at 100 or 105.
[Guest]: You know, so what that shows is, and the NCP got more seats, the Congress actually improved
[Guest]: upon its 2040 position, considering that they had a chief minister in 2014.
[Guest]: And they were completely down and out in 2019.
[Guest]: So that was quite commendable.
[Guest]: Now this has happened entirely because of the kind of voter that you have in Maharashtra.
[Guest]: You know, like I said about Chhatrapati Shivaji's socialist ethos, he wanted a Hindu Swaraj,
[Guest]: but he was not anti-Muslim in that sense.
[Guest]: And like someone had told me, being anti-Mughal is not being anti-Muslim.
[Guest]: He was anti-Mughal, he was anti-Orenze, but he was not anti-Muslim.
[Guest]: So that ethos remains with the people of Maharashtra.
[Guest]: And it is a socialist ethos, which takes along Dalits, which takes along Marathas, which
[Guest]: takes along Brahmins, because even Y.B.
[Guest]: Chavan and Vasanth Dada Patil and Sharad Pawar had accommodated the Brahmins.
[Guest]: They had been made, you know, I mean, chairman of the literary societies, you know, I mean,
[Guest]: and so many other things like that, they were not made to feel left out, like they were
[Guest]: not completely sidelined.
[Guest]: They were also included in governance and government and all the subsidiary bodies.
[Guest]: So everybody takes everybody along and goes.
[Guest]: It's only when RSS comes into the picture that this sharp divide comes between the Brahmins
[Guest]: and the non-Brahmins.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, without that, there is not such a sharp difference.
[Guest]: So Sharad Pawar realized and during the 2014 assembly campaign, I had been very critical
[Guest]: of Pawar when he had said, when he had told the people, do you want a return of the Peshwai
[Guest]: to Maharashtra?
[Guest]: You know, do you want them to gobble up the Marathas the way the Peshwas had done to Chhatrapati
[Guest]: Shivaji and his progeny?
[Guest]: And I said, why is he bringing out this caste and things like that?
[Guest]: But you know, I mean, he's the only leader, I think, in Maharashtra who has a sense of
[Guest]: history and he knows what has happened in the past, etc.
[Guest]: And then, of course, you know, I mean, the BJP came and the Marathas are the ruling clan.
[Guest]: Marathas are the ruling clan.
[Guest]: Lots of Maharashtrians will tell you that, you know, they did not really fight for freedom
[Guest]: in the sense a lot of Brahmins did, M.G.
[Guest]: Ranade, Gokhale, you know, all these people were there in the forefront.
[Guest]: Tilak also, he was also a Brahmin, etc.
[Guest]: He said, only when we came close to independence and then they realized which way the wind
[Guest]: was blowing, that they quickly jumped into the Congress bandwagon and, you know, they
[Guest]: came close to Mahatma Gandhi, etc. and Pandit Nehru and then they again came and captured
[Guest]: the independent government in Maharashtra, you know.
[Guest]: So they are the ruling class.
[Guest]: And even when Vasant Rao Naik was the Chief Minister, the longest serving Chief Minister
[Guest]: for 14 years, he could not do anything unless he had the sanction of the Maratha leaders
[Guest]: of the state.
[Guest]: And he was from Vidarbha and everybody grumbles about that, that the longest serving Chief
[Guest]: Minister of the state and he left Vidarbha backward and undeveloped and he developed
[Guest]: Western Maharashtra because that was a condition of the Marathas to keep a non-Maratha in power.
[Guest]: You know, there have been exceptions here and there.
[Guest]: Manohar Joshi was a Brahmin, but it was in a Shiv Sena government, etc.
[Guest]: Then when Devendra Fadnavis came, now he belongs to Nagpur, you know, he comes from a RSS
[Guest]: family and now the RSS, Fadnavis, everybody were determined to kind of sideline the Marathas,
[Guest]: not give them, you know, and linked into the cooperative thing.
[Guest]: Cooperative is also captured by Marathas only mostly.
[Guest]: So all those things kind of kicked in and the Congress and the NCP were also in danger
[Guest]: of losing their identity, you know.
[Guest]: And when Pawar saw what was happening and when there was a push from the Shiv Sena that,
[Guest]: you know, I mean, let us form the government together, he just grabbed that opportunity
[Guest]: with both hands and it's only he who could have pulled it off.
[Guest]: What was the Ajit Pawar side plot?
[Guest]: You know, see, Ajit Pawar, there is a problem with nephews in Maharashtra, Raj Thackeray
[Guest]: and Bal Thackeray and Ajit Pawar and Sharath Pawar, etc.
[Guest]: Beware of the nephew.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: The thing is, blood is thicker than water, blood is always thicker than water.
[Guest]: So Thackeray chose Uddhav over Raj and Sharath Pawar is too wily and too wise to declare
[Guest]: Supriya Sule as his political heir.
[Guest]: Every time I have asked him that why don't you declare, you know, because a lot of NCP
[Guest]: people tell me that Pawar Sahib is Pawar Sahib only because YB Chavan took him under his
[Guest]: wing and declared him as his political heir.
[Guest]: Now let him choose anybody.
[Guest]: Let him choose us.
[Guest]: Let him choose Supriya.
[Guest]: Let him choose Ajit.
[Guest]: Let him choose a lamp post.
[Guest]: But at least we know who to rally around for the second generation.
[Guest]: You know, so, but he doesn't do it.
[Guest]: When I ask him, he says he or she will rise from the grassroots.
[Amit Varma]: He or she.
[Guest]: He or she.
[Guest]: Now the use of the word she has been observed by Ajit Pawar, you know.
[Guest]: And when Supriya was first brought into electoral politics, when she was admitted into the NCP,
[Guest]: it was somewhere around 2006-2007, Ajit Pawar had told us reporters that, you know, simply
[Guest]: because Rahul Gandhi is the son of Sonia Gandhi, he doesn't automatically become the number
[Guest]: one in the Congress or the number two in the Congress.
[Amit Varma]: A sly reference to Supriya.
[Guest]: You know, so that was the thing.
[Guest]: But Pawar was very careful because in any case, you know, Supriya's education is such
[Guest]: that she can hold her own in Parliament.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I mean, so he kept them separate also like Ajit in the state and Supriya goes
[Guest]: to the Lok Sabha.
[Guest]: Yes, he's kept them there.
[Guest]: But you know, I mean, see Pawar is aging, you know, and he wants to make sure that he
[Guest]: used to once upon a time say that Rahul Gandhi has no spark, Rahul Gandhi has no spark.
[Guest]: But now lots of people are saying even Supriya has no spark.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, like she has not grown in the manner that he expected her to grow.
[Guest]: Okay, she's a member of Parliament, she holds good debates, you know, she raises good questions,
[Guest]: you know, she speaks well, etc.
[Guest]: But not like, you know, I mean, like, you know, like a like a blitz across the state,
[Guest]: you know, she's not been like that.
[Amit Varma]: I think it's a bit like reversion to the mean that all children of great parents will always
[Guest]: disappoint.
[Guest]: Yes, it is a bit like that.
[Guest]: But he's very, very concerned about her.
[Guest]: He wants to secure and ensure her future.
[Guest]: And he knows that if he leaves, leaves it in Ajit Pawar's hands, Ajit will never do
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: You know, Ajit will sideline her, he'll make her sit at home, at the most make her president
[Guest]: of the Mahila Agadi or something.
[Guest]: And that is not what he wants for her.
[Guest]: And Ajit is always afraid that there will be some point where he will choose the daughter
[Guest]: over the nephew.
[Amit Varma]: Why doesn't he?
[Amit Varma]: Why doesn't he just get it over with?
[Guest]: No, he's too wise.
[Guest]: He knows his party will break.
[Guest]: And you know, much as Ajit may not be like him.
[Guest]: Raj Chakri was a chip of the old block.
[Guest]: But Ajit Pawar is not so.
[Guest]: So Ajit may not be like him.
[Guest]: But there are more people in the NCP who would rather have Ajit as their leader than Supriya.
[Guest]: So he knows that.
[Guest]: He knows that the party will break in that sense.
[Guest]: They'll all go to Ajit.
[Guest]: And Supriya's future will be again in the doldrums.
[Guest]: So that is why he doesn't do it.
[Guest]: But somewhere I think Ajit wanted to strike out on his own and tell his uncle that I'm
[Guest]: also very capable.
[Guest]: And some years ago, just before he died, Vilas Rao Deshmukh was a former chief minister of
[Guest]: Maharashtra.
[Guest]: Ajit was facing the scandal of the education scam, etc.
[Guest]: He had told me that Ajit is as wealthy as Sharad Pawar.
[Guest]: Even wealthier.
[Guest]: He said, you know what, it took Pawar 40 years to earn.
[Guest]: Ajit has earned in 9 or 10 years.
[Guest]: You know, it was a way of telling me that all those allegations are probably true.
[Guest]: But then he said, but there is one thing that he will always be dependent upon Sharad Pawar
[Guest]: for.
[Guest]: He said, the currency with the common man.
[Guest]: He will never be able to win elections and connect with the common people the way Sharad
[Guest]: Pawar does.
[Guest]: The way Sharad Pawar thinks politics, Ajit is not capable of it.
[Guest]: And there was also a time, I think there's a central, when Chidambaram was the finance
[Guest]: minister in the UPA government.
[Guest]: And there is a central body where, I think a finance commission or something, where the
[Guest]: finance minister of some state heads that commission.
[Guest]: And Sushil Modi, who was the finance minister of Bihar, was the head of that.
[Guest]: And then this Neetesh Kumar broke off from the BJP.
[Guest]: And so the BJP was out of the government.
[Guest]: And then they were looking for someone.
[Guest]: So Chidambaram called Prithviraj Chavan, who was the chief minister, saying, I would rather
[Guest]: now give it to a finance minister from a formless led government than to a BJP led government.
[Guest]: So please recommend your finance minister's name.
[Guest]: So Prithviraj Chavan asked Ajit Pawar.
[Guest]: And Ajit Pawar said, can I have the bureaucrats sitting with me at those meeting?
[Guest]: So Prithviraj Chavan said, no, this is a meeting of finance ministers, not for bureaucrats.
[Guest]: Bureaucrats can't advise you.
[Guest]: He said, then I don't want to be.
[Guest]: I don't want to be because he could not hold his own with the people in Delhi.
[Guest]: He's OK in this pocket borrow of Baramati.
[Guest]: He doesn't even understand Vidarbha properly as Sharath Pawar does.
[Guest]: He doesn't even...
[Guest]: You know, about Sharath Pawar, one story that I really love about him is, you know, he went
[Guest]: up in a helicopter.
[Guest]: In fact, there are two stories.
[Guest]: He went up in a helicopter and that helicopter would not kind of... it could not take off.
[Guest]: There were headwinds.
[Guest]: So it could not...
[Amit Varma]: He was coming from Pune to Bombay, I think.
[Guest]: Yeah, Pune to Bombay.
[Guest]: And then he went back.
[Guest]: He shed some luggage.
[Guest]: He shed some people, still couldn't do it.
[Guest]: So he came by road and he was very late for the meeting that he had.
[Guest]: And he said, I need to have a road which will take me from Pune to Mumbai in two hours.
[Guest]: And that is how we got the expressway.
[Amit Varma]: His brainchild, even though Gadkari gets credit in the popular imagination.
[Guest]: Gadkari takes credit for it.
[Guest]: But like I told you earlier, Sharath Pawar doesn't know how to take credit.
[Guest]: He doesn't know how to hype.
[Guest]: He doesn't know how to tom-tom.
[Guest]: But it was his brainchild, you know.
[Guest]: But the second story, he was in this helicopter with about two journalists and the chopper
[Guest]: ran out of fuel.
[Guest]: And the pilot was in a panic.
[Guest]: He said, Sir, we have only about 15 minutes of fuel left and we are nowhere near landing.
[Guest]: So Sharath Pawar said, you just tell me, you look at your compass and tell me exactly
[Guest]: where you are.
[Guest]: You know, which is... you give me your coordinates.
[Guest]: So he told him that we are here.
[Guest]: So Sharath Pawar said that if I go by road, I will turn right.
[Guest]: How do you have to go by air?
[Guest]: So the pilot took the chopper in that direction.
[Guest]: So he said, then I would turn left.
[Guest]: How do you go from here?
[Guest]: You know, so the pilot took this one.
[Guest]: Then he said, now you kind of go this way, go that way.
[Guest]: He directed him.
[Guest]: Then finally, when they came with just about five minutes fuel left, he said, there has
[Guest]: to be a school ground here or a market yard here.
[Guest]: Just see whether it is there and land there.
[Guest]: You know, they found the school ground and they landed in the school.
[Amit Varma]: And those two journalists are never going to give him bad press ever again.
[Guest]: You know, he knows Maharashtra like the back of his hand.
[Guest]: Once when I went, you know, election coverage, I took a car and went all the way from Bombay
[Guest]: and I went all the way to Lathur, which was the South Maharashtra point.
[Guest]: You know, next was Hyderabad or whatever.
[Guest]: And then when I was coming back, so Pawar said, where are you going?
[Guest]: I said, I think maybe I'll halt in either Karad or Pune, Mr. Pawar.
[Guest]: And then I will go to go to Bombay tomorrow morning.
[Guest]: So you know, he actually directed me, go from here, then you will come to this village
[Guest]: and then you will find this tree and this tree shaped like this.
[Guest]: And from there you go like that.
[Guest]: And then you go so many miles and then this village is there and you turn there.
[Guest]: My head was spinning, you know, I said, how does he know?
[Guest]: And then I told my driver, so he said, understand a little bit, madam, but we will ask and then
[Guest]: go.
[Guest]: Actually, I cut the distance, you know, I mean, by about two or three hours.
[Guest]: And so he knows Maharashtra like the back of his hand.
[Guest]: Ajit Pawar does not know that, but he probably tried to strike out on his own, tried to tell
[Guest]: his uncle that I can also do whatever you want.
[Guest]: But the reason why Pawar did not declare anybody has his air and he did not allow people to
[Guest]: rally around the second generation was why he got the result he got, you know, because,
[Guest]: you know, the moment the MLAs realized that Ajit doesn't have Sharad Pawar's support,
[Guest]: they all kind of came back and they left Ajit with no opportunity but to come back, you
[Guest]: know.
[Guest]: So it was a, what do you say, a storm in a teacup.
[Amit Varma]: And Sharad Pawar, the master manipulator and strategist, but not good at optics.
[Guest]: He can't take credit for things.
[Guest]: No, no, he just can't.
[Guest]: But also note, Amit, that, you know, Sharad Pawar has taken both Raj Thackeray and Uddhav
[Guest]: Thackeray under his wing, Shiv Sena and the Maharashtra Navnirman Sena, both parties who
[Guest]: occasionally go against.
[Guest]: North Indians, South Indians are violent, are pro-Hindutva, etc.
[Guest]: He has secularized them.
[Guest]: He has brought them into the mainstream.
[Guest]: You know, the space there, you know, is completely different now.
[Guest]: He's got to socialize them, socialistic.
[Guest]: Why?
[Guest]: Maharashtrian ethos is a socialist ethos.
[Guest]: It is not a pro-Hindutva ethos.
[Guest]: So he has left now the BJP and the RSS, which is only a 5 to 10% vote, pure Hindutva vote.
[Guest]: The rest of them vote for Shiv Sena, vote for MNS, but they're also the Marathi Manus
[Guest]: vote, which comes up to about 25% and 30%.
[Guest]: So he has separated the two, Hindutva on one side and Marathi Manus on the other side.
[Amit Varma]: So to end this episode, what I'll ask you for is I'll ask you to evaluate each of the
[Amit Varma]: five parties.
[Amit Varma]: I'm also counting MNS.
[Amit Varma]: Each of the five parties one by one for me, where do they stand?
[Amit Varma]: What is their future?
[Amit Varma]: And so on.
[Amit Varma]: Let's start with the Shiv Sena because we've spoken so much about them and you've written
[Amit Varma]: so much about them and you know them all personally.
[Amit Varma]: It's been said that Bal Thackeray once said or repeatedly said, in fact, that Uddhav is
[Amit Varma]: a fine strategist and one of the best minds he knows.
[Amit Varma]: Is that true?
[Amit Varma]: What is your take of Uddhav?
[Amit Varma]: And my follow up question to that is that what is the future of the Shiv Sena in the
[Amit Varma]: sense that in terms of what niche do they occupy in the political marketplace?
[Amit Varma]: Like initially they started off with the whole Marathi Manus Singh, then they attacked South
[Amit Varma]: Indians for a while, they attacked Muslims for a while and went the Hindutva way.
[Amit Varma]: They attacked North Indian migrants for a while.
[Amit Varma]: What niche in the market, where are they going to position themselves in the future?
[Amit Varma]: And what kind of a leader is Uddhav?
[Amit Varma]: Is he sort of a tactical go with the flow kind of person or does he have an ideology
[Amit Varma]: and beliefs of his own?
[Guest]: See, so far he has proved that he's only go with the flow kind of a person.
[Guest]: He has gone with the flow.
[Guest]: But if he wants his party to survive, this is a miracle that he has managed to become
[Guest]: the chief minister of Maharashtra.
[Guest]: Nobody expected that.
[Guest]: But he must use his stint as the chief minister to broaden the base of the Shiv Sena now.
[Guest]: He has to kind of move away from the, what do you say, from the 60s and 70s Marathi Manus.
[Guest]: The kind of 60s and 70s Marathi Manus, if I may be politically incorrect and say the
[Guest]: lumpens and the extortionists etc.
[Guest]: Because Maharashtrians are also very aspirational.
[Guest]: They are youth, they want to take their place in the world.
[Guest]: They want to earn the same kind of salaries that other people are earning.
[Guest]: They want to go abroad.
[Guest]: I mean, they want to do things and they never got a chance.
[Guest]: The Shiv Sena voters never got a chance to do this.
[Guest]: Those Maharashtrians who managed to achieve all these things were never the Shiv Sena
[Guest]: voters.
[Guest]: So he has to make sure, you know, I mean, that, you know, Maharashtra also does not
[Guest]: have a trader class, which is why there are a lot of Gujaratis and Marwadis and Sindhis
[Guest]: and others.
[Guest]: From Shivaji's time, they don't have a trader class.
[Guest]: And Shivaji had actually invited traders from Gujarat and neighboring states to come and
[Guest]: settle here.
[Guest]: And so, so he has to make sure that, you know, there are some Maharashtrian entrepreneurs
[Guest]: who are given a kind of, I won't say subsidies, but they're given encouragement, a leg up
[Guest]: and everything to do something.
[Amit Varma]: Enabled in a friendly environment.
[Amit Varma]: Yes, yes.
[Guest]: That he must do.
[Guest]: He must broad base the Shiv Sena.
[Guest]: Otherwise, even the stint in power will not take him anywhere.
[Guest]: And I think he will consciously put the Ram temple in the back burner because according
[Guest]: to him, I think what he thinks is that now the Supreme Court has already given its verdict.
[Guest]: There is no political mileage left in that, you know, I mean, the minority community is
[Guest]: not opposing it.
[Guest]: In fact, many in them are saying that, let it go.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, we will take the five acres of land and we'll do something over there.
[Guest]: So there is no political mileage in it, you know, I mean, and then he's already needling
[Guest]: the BJP saying that don't claim credit for it.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, you didn't have the guts.
[Guest]: We asked you to pass a law.
[Guest]: You didn't pass a law.
[Guest]: You know, you're fighting from the shoulders of the Supreme Court.
[Guest]: So, you know, that politically it is over.
[Guest]: So he has to broad base the Shiv Sena.
[Amit Varma]: But my question there is that if you broad base it, how do you differentiate yourself
[Amit Varma]: from the NCP and the Congress?
[Amit Varma]: Because they are also kind of broad based in a sense.
[Guest]: What is the difference?
[Guest]: Yeah, you know, that is it, you know, I mean, but you know, this is Marathi Manus.
[Guest]: His competition is mostly with NCP, not so much with the Congress, because the NCP also,
[Guest]: however much it has tried in the past 10-12 years, it has remained only a regional party
[Guest]: and that to Western Maharashtra, you know, Sharad Pawar, such a tall leader like Sharad
[Guest]: Pawar, he's not been able to give a push to his party beyond Western Maharashtra.
[Guest]: Vidarbha may there is nothing, you know, I mean, Mumbai also, they don't win anything.
[Guest]: They don't get anything in Mumbai.
[Guest]: So Pawar will also make that effort.
[Guest]: He will try and see.
[Guest]: So that will, while the BJP was cannibalizing the Shiv Sena on Hindutva, it is likely that
[Guest]: the NCP will cannibalize the Shiv Sena on the Marathi Manus thing.
[Guest]: And once again, I don't know people like industrialist, Kiloskars, Garwaris, I don't know who they
[Guest]: will prefer.
[Guest]: I think they might prefer Sharad Pawar to Uddhav Thackeray.
[Guest]: But you know, if Sharad Pawar doesn't manage to get someone in place, Ajit Pawar, Supriya
[Guest]: Asule, to take his legacy forward, then they might choose Uddhav Thackeray because he's
[Guest]: a young, he's already put Aditya Thackeray in place, you know, I mean, they might prefer
[Amit Varma]: him.
[Guest]: I think the CM will help his brand a lot over the next few years.
[Amit Varma]: What about the MNS?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, they didn't do anything in this election, of course, but are they going to be a force?
[Amit Varma]: Do they have any issues?
[Amit Varma]: Because like you pointed out, the early issues Raj took up were a non-starter because a Marathi
[Guest]: Manus had already gotten all the jobs, right?
[Guest]: Bal Thackeray had once.
[Guest]: Actually, Raj Thackeray, I'm beginning to feel a bit sorry for him.
[Guest]: You know, he kind of, of course, he tried to take off on the 60s, 70s thing, but it
[Guest]: didn't work.
[Guest]: I mean, because there are two things, one, of course, the locals have got the jobs.
[Guest]: The second thing is if you're still fighting for jobs for ferrywallas and, you know, taxi
[Guest]: drivers and all that, that means in 30, 40, 50 years, you know, I mean, the Marathi Manus
[Guest]: has not progressed, you know, I mean, then whose fault is it?
[Guest]: You know, I mean, it is not anybody else's fault.
[Guest]: It's your own fault that you were not able to bring them out of it.
[Guest]: Now, he realized that and he stopped his anti-North Indian rhetoric.
[Guest]: He stopped his anti-Muslim rhetoric, etc.
[Guest]: And at that point of time, he was occupying a space.
[Guest]: During the Lok Sabha elections, he was occupying a space clearly opposed to the Shiv Sena and
[Guest]: the BJP, you know, and until the assembly elections, when the assembly elections, of
[Guest]: course, he didn't succeed very much, but he was still occupying that space.
[Guest]: He had wanted an alliance with the Congress and the NCP and he went all the way to Delhi
[Guest]: and he met Sonia Gandhi.
[Guest]: You know, I saw that as a paradigm shift that, you know, Sonia Gandhi even gave him an audience,
[Guest]: you know, I mean, she allowed considering how it used to be between the two parties.
[Guest]: And then apparently Sonia told him directly that, you know, my leaders in Maharashtra
[Guest]: do not want this alliance because they feel that your votes do not get transferred to
[Guest]: the Congress, which is also true because a lot of MNS voters kind of told me that, you
[Guest]: know, although Raj was saying vote for Congress and NCP during the Lok Sabha elections.
[Guest]: So, you know, I mean, their mentality is that.
[Guest]: Now he has to rescue and he has to save those people.
[Guest]: He has to now evolve something and he's in the most trouble now.
[Guest]: Congress will survive.
[Guest]: NCP will also survive to a large extent, but either he has to merge with the Shiv Sena
[Guest]: and they have to go back.
[Guest]: You know, now Uddhav has achieved everything, he has become the chief minister.
[Guest]: They have to go back, you know, he'll be the campaigner.
[Guest]: Uddhav will be the chief minister.
[Guest]: He'll be the strategist.
[Guest]: Either they have to do that or he has to evolve in identity.
[Guest]: How he will evolve, I don't know.
[Amit Varma]: Let's talk about the NCP.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, Sharath Pawar and we probably could, you know, devote a full episode to the man
[Amit Varma]: because what a fascinating man and what an incredible career he's had.
[Amit Varma]: But he's growing old.
[Amit Varma]: You know, he's got these two kids who haven't really marked themselves out in spectacular
[Amit Varma]: ways at all.
[Amit Varma]: What does the NCP stand for?
[Amit Varma]: What is their future?
[Guest]: What do you see ahead for them?
[Guest]: See, NCP is only another wing of the Congress.
[Guest]: And for the past five years, you know, what has happened today?
[Guest]: We heard that he went, you know, he went and he met Modi in Delhi, Narendra Modi in Delhi.
[Guest]: And he himself admits that Narendra Modi suggested that the NCP support the BJP and we form a
[Guest]: government.
[Guest]: And I told him that not possible because my party is a small party.
[Guest]: What he actually meant is that ideology is very different.
[Guest]: It is not possible.
[Guest]: He would have got swallowed up faster than the Shiv Sena if he had done.
[Guest]: And over the past five years, there was a bitter fight between NCP supporters.
[Guest]: You know, there was one group saying that we should align with the BJP and another group
[Guest]: saying that, no, we should stay secular.
[Guest]: And they almost came to blows about two or three years ago.
[Guest]: And then suddenly, Sharad Pawar decided that, no, we are realigning with the Congress.
[Guest]: And they had begun to lose.
[Guest]: They had been confusing their voters because Pawar was also making very pro-Modi statements.
[Guest]: Sometimes Modi was saying that, he handed me through politics and voters were getting
[Guest]: confused.
[Guest]: Then Pawar came out openly with some anti-Modi statements.
[Guest]: And then the election results that he has got, he has realized that this is the anti-BJP
[Guest]: vote that he has got.
[Guest]: So he cannot afford to align with the BJP.
[Guest]: And he has to face a lot of Zilla Parishad and municipal corporation elections in the
[Guest]: next year or so.
[Guest]: And the BJP has managed to capture his home turf of Pune and also some bodies in Baramuthi,
[Guest]: etc.
[Guest]: He needs to wrest them back.
[Guest]: So his near-term focus will be on that.
[Guest]: How to get it back.
[Guest]: And I have a feeling, eventually, there will be a merger between the Congress and the NCP.
[Guest]: There's no way.
[Guest]: There has to be a merger between MNS and Shiv Sena.
[Guest]: There will have to be a merger between Congress and NC.
[Amit Varma]: At a purely human level, do you think of Sharad Pawar sitting down alone and thinking to himself
[Amit Varma]: that, look, I've achieved my political peak, which was becoming chief minister and central
[Amit Varma]: minister and all that, and achieved it many times.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm never going to be prime minister.
[Amit Varma]: And so my best is clearly behind me.
[Amit Varma]: And now it's sort of struggling to maintain status quo, running to stand still.
[Amit Varma]: Why would he be motivated by that?
[Guest]: He's a political animal.
[Guest]: He's a real political animal.
[Guest]: You know, the pictures that we saw, the viral video of him standing in the rain and campaigning,
[Guest]: pouring rain, etc.
[Guest]: Lots of NCP people say, but he's like that.
[Guest]: He was always like that.
[Guest]: The only thing is, there is so much technology now.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, so those pictures become viral.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, they get shared on social media, etc.
[Guest]: But he was always like that.
[Guest]: He will never retire.
[Guest]: He was almost in semi-retirement, you know, just before the Vidhan Sabha elections.
[Guest]: And then they fingered him and then he got up like, you know, like on his horse and charged
[Guest]: off, you know, I mean, like an ancient knight would do something like that.
[Guest]: He did.
[Guest]: He got into his car and he went.
[Guest]: And when I called him for an interview, I want an interview.
[Guest]: He said, I'm not coming back to Mumbai for a very long time.
[Guest]: And then I chased him.
[Guest]: I said, then I will meet you wherever you are, you know.
[Guest]: So he said, OK, I'll tell you my program.
[Guest]: I went to Nagpur.
[Guest]: He was out of Nagpur.
[Guest]: I went to Nasik.
[Guest]: He was out of Nasik.
[Guest]: You know, so he really has the energy even at this age.
[Guest]: He will never retire.
[Guest]: And now he's becoming the fulcrum of opposition unity.
[Guest]: The experiment in Maharashtra has told the opposition that they can achieve it if they
[Guest]: are all together.
[Guest]: He's becoming the fulcrum of opposition unity.
[Guest]: And he will still be.
[Guest]: See, Murarji Desai at the age of 99, he still thought that people will call him to become
[Guest]: prime minister again.
[Guest]: You know, they never lose their ambition.
[Guest]: I think Sharad Pawar will never lose his ambition.
[Amit Varma]: I don't know if that's more inspiring or more sad, but let's move on to the Congress.
[Amit Varma]: You know, where are they now?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, nationally, they've been going down just massively.
[Amit Varma]: They've had two consecutive Lok Sabha elections where they've got like 50 seats on.
[Amit Varma]: And at the same time, they are still getting all those millions of votes, all those crores
[Amit Varma]: of votes.
[Amit Varma]: So what are they in Maharashtra?
[Amit Varma]: Do they have a chance of ever coming back?
[Amit Varma]: Or is it just a big old machine gradually grinding to a halt slowly?
[Guest]: See, what the Congress needs to do, frankly speaking, is to build a leadership in the
[Guest]: states.
[Guest]: You cannot be centralized anymore.
[Guest]: You know, a party president needs to be there to glue the sides together.
[Guest]: This election, I remember when the Congress and the NCP shared their seats, the Congress
[Guest]: gave the NCP 125 seats out of 288.
[Guest]: And at that point of time, the NCP was virtually on its last legs.
[Guest]: All stalwarts had gone to the BJP.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, there was hardly any chance and hope.
[Guest]: So I asked one AICC General Secretary that, you know, I mean, why so many seats?
[Guest]: You could have given 100 and Pawar would have been satisfied.
[Guest]: So he said, I asked Sunia Gandhi the same thing.
[Guest]: And Madam told me, tell me, do we have anybody in Maharashtra who can match Sharad Pawar's
[Guest]: level, who can get me the kind of seats that I want from Maharashtra?
[Guest]: So until you can find me a leader like that, I have to do what Sharad Pawar tells me.
[Guest]: And even in this entire government formation, she went entirely by Sharad Pawar's advice.
[Guest]: What Sharad Pawar said, she did, she signed on the dotted line.
[Guest]: Even Rahul Gandhi was overruled, even, you know, I mean, some of the South Indian leaders
[Guest]: who remember the anti-South Indian campaign of the Shiv Sena, they were overruled, etc.
[Guest]: So taking lessons from that, okay, Sharad Pawar, she said, Sharad Pawar technically
[Guest]: NCP, but basically he's a congressman.
[Guest]: And it is because he broke away from the Congress that he has acquired this kind of a stature.
[Guest]: Now there is Mamata Banerjee who has broken away from the Congress.
[Guest]: So many other people, even Chandrababu Naidu is technically a congressman, you know, I
[Guest]: mean, he went with his father-in-law.
[Guest]: So even if you are not able to get them back into the Congress, you have to develop state
[Guest]: leaderships because, you know, each state is different from the another.
[Guest]: Sitting in Delhi, you will not be, if you want to be a national party, you will never
[Guest]: be able to understand unless you have regional leadership.
[Guest]: So you have to develop that regional leadership.
[Guest]: If they don't do it, then they are doomed.
[Amit Varma]: Very wise words.
[Amit Varma]: And now finally, let's end with talking, of course, about the BJP because, and there this
[Amit Varma]: is like the BJP in the Maharashtra is just one arm of this phenomenon that's kind of
[Amit Varma]: erupted in Indian politics in the last five years to the dismay of many, but it's all
[Amit Varma]: very interesting.
[Amit Varma]: So what are they trying to do?
[Amit Varma]: How do they position themselves?
[Amit Varma]: You know, are they going to be a behemoth in the state as they are nationally, or is
[Amit Varma]: it eventually going to crumble under the weight of its own contradictions?
[Guest]: See, I'll tell you, BJP in Maharashtra also suffers the same syndrome that the Congress
[Guest]: is suffering.
[Guest]: They have a strong state leadership, although one might dispute that the Congress doesn't
[Guest]: really have a strong, strong state leadership, but for whatever it is worth, it is there.
[Guest]: Without that national leadership, no leader in Maharashtra will be able to win any number
[Guest]: of seats.
[Guest]: Had it been left entirely to Devendra Fadnavis, they would not even have got 105 seats.
[Guest]: And at the moment, the manner in which they conducted and particularly Fadnavis conducted
[Guest]: himself, you know, I mean, sidelining lots of his rivals, you know, I mean, and Pankaj
[Guest]: Amundey is complaining that, you know, I mean, he conspired with my cousin to defeat me.
[Guest]: We hear that she has gone to Udhav and she said, I have the support of 12 MLAs.
[Guest]: Anytime you say I will come over with my MLAs to you.
[Guest]: There are a lot of people who are not given tickets because Fadnavis didn't want them
[Guest]: to contest and did not want it to be a competition.
[Guest]: So there are a lot of factions developing in the state BJP and it is on the point of
[Guest]: cracking and coming to the surface.
[Guest]: And left on his own, Fadnavis will never be able to win an election.
[Guest]: So until you have the strong leadership in the center, maybe they will win the elections.
[Guest]: But they also need to develop a better, you know, like in the sense that they had given
[Guest]: charge to Nitin Gadkari.
[Guest]: They would not have lost the government because Nitin Gadkari is a better campaigner.
[Guest]: Nitin Gadkari is better at gluing things together.
[Guest]: You know, he's better at putting together alliances, you know.
[Guest]: The backroom work would have been much better.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: So they will also have to do a lot of rethinking.
[Guest]: Until they are there, maybe they will win.
[Guest]: But even with their being at the height of power, they managed to get only 105 seats
[Guest]: this time.
[Guest]: So what, who knows what they might get next time.
[Amit Varma]: It's been really fascinating talking to you.
[Amit Varma]: You've just brought Maharashtra politics so alive for me.
[Amit Varma]: And I urge all my listeners to go out and buy Maharashtra Maximus and Hindu Hridaya
[Amit Varma]: Samrat immediately, as well as a Kindle single Marathi Manus.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much, Sujata.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, hop over to your nearest bookstore online
[Amit Varma]: or offline and buy Hindu Hridaya Samrat and Maharashtra Maximus.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Sujata on Twitter at Sujata Anandan.
[Amit Varma]: That's one word.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Scene and the Unseen at sceneunseen.in, thinkpragati.com
[Amit Varma]: and ivmpodcast.com.
[Amit Varma]: The Scene and the Unseen is supported by the Takshashila Institution.
[Amit Varma]: Master's courses for public policy begin again in January.
[Amit Varma]: For more information, head on over to takshashila.org.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: Well, here's a show that can help you move an inch closer to being aware of what your rights are.
[Unknown]: Tune in to Know Your Kanun with me, Amar Rana.
[Unknown]: This is a podcast meant to answer all your law-related queries.
[Unknown]: Catch Know Your Kanun every week on the IVM website or the app or anywhere you get your
[Unknown]: podcast from.